Conspiracy Theories in
American History

Advisory Board
David Brion Davis
Douglas Kellner
Richard King
Berndt Ostendorf
Gordon Wood

Conspiracy Theories in
American History
An Encyclopedia

Volume 1
A–L
Edited by
Peter Knight
Associate Editors
Robert Alan Goldberg
Jeffrey L. Pasley
Larry Schweikart

Santa Barbara, California

Denver, Colorado

Oxford, England

COPYRIGHT © 2003 BY PETER KNIGHT
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording,
or otherwise, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission
in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Conspiracy theories in American history: an encyclopedia / edited by
Peter Knight.
p. cm.
“Also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook—T.p. verso.”
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-57607-812-4 (alk. paper) 1-57607-813-2 (eBook)
1. Conspiracies—United States—History—Encyclopedias. 2. United
States—History—Encyclopedias. I. Knight, Peter, 1968–
E179.C66 2003
973'.03—dc22
2003019565
07

06

05

04

03

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. Visit http://www.abc-clio.com
for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper. ∞
Manufactured in the United States of America

Contents
Foreword, David Brion Davis ix
Preface, Peter Knight xi
Contributors xiii
Conspiracy Theories in America: A Historical Overview, Robert Alan Goldberg 1
Making Sense of Conspiracy Theories, Peter Knight 15
Conspiracy Theories in American History
Volume 1
A
Abolitionism 27
Abortion 33
African Americans 35
Agent Orange 40
AIDS 42
Alien and Sedition Acts 48
American Indian
Movement 55
American Protective
Association 58
American Revolution 59
Anarchists 62
Anti-Catholicism 63
Anticommunism 68
Anti-Federalists 73
Anti-Masonic Party 75
Anti-Rent War 77
Antisemitism 79
Apocalypticism 85
Area 51 91

Arnold, Benedict 92
Aryan Nations 94
Asian Americans 95
Atomic Secrets 97
Aurora 100
B
B-25 Ghost Bomber 103
Bacon’s Rebellion 104
Banco Nazionale del
Lavoro 105
Bank of Credit and Commerce
International 106
Bank of England 108
Bank of the United
States 110
Bank War 112
Barruel, Abbé 115
Bay of Pigs Invasion 117
Beam, Louis 119
Bell, Art 120
Berg, Alan 121

Biddle, Nicholas 122
Bilderbergers 123
Black Helicopters 124
Black Panthers 126
Booth, John Wilkes 128
Boston Massacre 130
Boston Tea Party 132
British Royal Family 134
Brown, John 135
Brown Scare 137
Brussell, Mae 140
Bryan, William Jennings 141
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Firearms 143
Burr, Aaron 145
Burroughs, William S. 147
Bush, George 149
C
Cambodia, Secret Bombing
of 151
Castro, Fidel 152
v

Contents

Cattle Mutilations 153
Central Intelligence
Agency 155
Chambers, Whittaker 159
Chappaquiddick 162
Chicago 7 165
Christian Identity 167
Christian Science 168
Church of the SubGenius 170
Civil Rights Movement 171
Clan of the Mystic
Confederacy 174
Clinton, Bill and Hillary 175
Clinton Body Count 177
Cocaine 179
Coercive Acts 184
COINTELPRO 185
Cold War 189
Constitution, U.S. 196
Contrails 197
Conway Cabal, The 199
Copperheads 201
Corporations 203
Coughlin, Father
Charles 207
Council on Foreign Relations
210
Covert Action Quarterly 212
Crédit Mobilier Scandal 213
Cronenberg, David 214
Cuban Missile Crisis 216
D
DeLillo, Don 219
Democratic-Republican
Societies 220
Dick, Philip K. 222
Disunion, Fears of 224
Dollar Bill 226
Domestic Terrorism 227
Dominion Theology 232
Donnelly, Ignatius 233

vi

Dorr War, The
Drugs 236

234

E
Encryption 241
Eugenics 243
Executive Intelligence
Review 245
F
Farrakhan, Louis 247
Federal Bureau of
Investigation 248
Federal Emergency
Management Agency 250
Federal Reserve System 252
Film and Conspiracy
Theory 255
Fluoridation 263
Ford, Henry 265
Foster, Vince 267
Freemasonry 269
Freemen 275
Fugitive Slave Act 276

G
Genet, Citizen Edmond
Charles 279
German Americans and
World War I 281
Ghost Dance Religion 282
Gold Standard 285
Green Corn Rebellion, The 289
Gulf War Syndrome 290
H
Hackers 293
Hamilton, Alexander 296
Harding, Warren G. 297
Hartford Convention 300
Hawaii, Attempted U.S.
Takeover of 302

Haymarket Bombing 304
Health Scares 306
Hearst, William Randolph 311
Hiss, Alger 313
Hoffa, Jimmy 317
Hollywood Ten 318
Holocaust, Denial of 321
Hoover, J. Edgar 324
House Un-American Activities
Committee 325
Hughes, Howard 328
Hutchinson, Anne 330
I
Identification Cards 333
Illuminati 335
Illuminatus! Trilogy, The 339
Income Tax and the Internal
Revenue Service 341
Industrial Workers of the
World 344
Internet 347
Iran-Contra 349
Irish Republican Army 353
Iron Heel, The 354
J
Jackson, Andrew 357
Japanese Americans 364
Jefferson, Thomas 366
Jesuits 369
Jewish Defense League 371
John Birch Society 373
Johnson, Lyndon Baines 374
Jonestown 377
K
KAL 007 381
Kennedy, John F., Assassination
of 383
Kennedy, Robert F.,
Assassination of 397

Contents

King, Martin Luther, Jr.,
Assassination of 402
Kissinger, Henry 410
Know-Nothings 412
Koch Brothers 414
Ku Klux Klan 415
L
LaRouche, Lyndon 423
Leisler’s Rebellion 424
Lennon, John, Shooting of 426
Lewis, Meriwether 428
Libertarianism 431
Liberty Lobby 432
Liddy, G. Gordon 433
Lincoln, Abraham, Assassination
of 435
Lindbergh Baby Kidnapping
441
Lindsey, Hal 445
Long, Huey 446
LSD 447
Lusitania, Sinking of 449
Volume 2
M
Mafia 451
Mailer, Norman 453
Malcolm X, Assassination
of 454
Manchurian Candidate, The
457
Manson, Charles 459
McCarthy, Joseph 460
Mexican-American War 464
Microsoft 466
Militias 467
Millenarianism 476
Millerites 478
Mind Control 480
MJ-12 489

MK-ULTRA

490
Molly Maguires, The 492
Monk, Maria 495
Monroe, Marilyn 498
Moon Landings 500
Moonies 503
Morgan, John Pierpont 505
Morgan, William 507
Mormonism 508
Morse, Jedidiah 511
MOVE 513
Muhammad, Elijah 515
N
Nation of Islam 517
National Rifle Association 518
National Security Agency 520
Native Americans 522
Nativism 529
Neo-Nazis 533
New World Order 536
Newburgh Conspiracy 539
Nixon, Richard 541
Nuclear Freeze
Movement 542
Nullification 544

Panama Canal 574
Paranoia 576
Patriarchy 578
Pearl Harbor 579
Pentagon Papers 582
Philadelphia Experiment 583
Pierce, William L. 585
Pontiac, Chief 587
Populism 589
Posse Comitatus 591
Pound, Ezra 592
Protocols of the Elders of
Zion 595
Puritans 597
Pynchon, Thomas 601
Q
Quebec Act

605

O
October Surprise 547
Octopus 550
Oil Industry 550
Oklahoma City Bombing 553
Onassis, Aristotle 557
One-World Government 558
Operation Paperclip 560
Opinion Polls about Conspiracy
Theories 561
Oswald, Lee Harvey 564

R
Rap 607
Reagan, Ronald, Attempted
Assassination of 609
Red Scare 610
Red Summer of 1919 614
Regulator Movement 617
Report from Iron
Mountain 618
RICO 619
Robertson, Pat 620
Robison, John 621
Rockefeller Family 623
Roosevelt, Franklin
Delano 624
Roswell 627
Ruby, Jack 630
Ruby Ridge 632

P
Pakula, Alan. J. 571
Pan Am 103 571

S
Sacco and Vanzetti 637
Salem Witch Trials 639

vii

Contents

San Francisco Vigilance
Committee 640
Satanic Ritual Abuse 642
Savings and Loan Crisis 643
Scaife, Richard Mellon 645
Scientology 646
Secular Humanism 647
September 11 648
Seventh Day Adventists 651
Shakur, Tupac 651
Shays’ Rebellion 652
Silver Shirts 653
Skolnick, Sherman 655
Skull and Bones Society 656
Slave Power 658
Slave Revolts 662
Smith, Gerald L. K. 666
Society of the Cincinnati 667
Spotlight 669
Stamp Act 670
Steamshovel Press 672
Stock Market Crash of
1929 673
Stone, Oliver 675
Stono Rebellion 679
Students for a Democratic
Society 680

Subliminal Advertising
Survivalism 683

682

T
Tobacco Industry 685
Toledo War 686
Tonkin Gulf Incidents 689
Torbitt Document 690
Trilateral Commission 691
Trusts 692
Turner, Nat 694
TWA 800 696
U
UFOs 699
Unabomber, The 705
United Nations, The 707
Universal Price Codes 709
USS Maine 709
V
Venona 713
Vesey, Denmark

714

W
Waco 717
Walker, William

719

Primary Source Documents 759
Index 889
About the Editor 925

viii

Wall Street 721
Warren Commission
Report 723
Watergate 725
Weathermen 731
Whiskey Rebellion 733
White Slave Trade 735
Whitewater 737
Witchcraft 739
X
X-Files, The 743
XYZ Affair 745
Y
Y2K 747
Yalta Conference 748
Yellow Journalism 750
Yippies 752
Z
Zenger, John Peter 755
Zimmermann Telegram 756
ZOG 758

Foreword
Though most of my professional writing has dealt
with slavery and antislavery on a global scale, in the
late 1950s I was struck by similar and almost hysterical patterns in the pre–Civil War American literature exposing the alleged conspiratorial dangers
posed by the Freemasons, Catholics, and Mormons, three groups as different from one another
as anyone could imagine. In 1960 I published a
widely reprinted article on these “themes of
counter-subversion.” In retrospect, I’m sure I was
influenced by my distaste for McCarthyism and
other forms of cold war extremism. Nine years
later, having then written extensively on what I
termed “the problem of slavery,” I sought in a public lecture series to combine the themes of conspiracy and slavery by examining some of the links and
similarities between the southern view of abolitionists as subversives, the growing northern fear of a
southern “Slave Power,” and the supposed plots
against America beginning with the British crown
and the French Illuminati and extending on to the
Masons, Catholics, Wall Street bankers, Jews,
Communists, and exponents of Black Power. (I also
had the good fortune to be exchanging ideas and
information with the great historian Richard Hofstadter, who in 1964 published a very influential
essay, “The Paranoid Style in American Politics.”)
In 1971, two years after the appearance of my short
book The Slave Power Conspiracy and the Paranoid Style, I edited a book of primary sources, The
Fear of Conspiracy, which moved from the period
of the American Revolution to debates over the

Vietnam War. In all of these writings I tried to
emphasize that there are genuine conspiracies and
that some of the voices of alarm, such as those
raised against a southern Slave Power, were based
on more than a grain of truth.
But Peter Knight’s Conspiracy Theories in
American History: An Encyclopedia makes it clear
that some of my other premises and assumptions in
1971 were somewhat naïve, especially in the sense
of not realizing where we Americans were headed.
In 1971, as in the 1960s, it simply seemed insightful to expose and compare patterns of American
“paranoid” thinking from the Revolution to modern times, and to relate such exaggerated fears to
the insecurity fostered by the explosive growth of
what Alexis de Tocqueville imaginatively termed
“individualism”—a dissolution of community that
could easily promote a need to “breathe together,”
to join in secret agreements, as suggested by the
Latin root word “conspirare.” One can surely argue
that a free, democratic society requires an attentive
alertness to the misuses of power. If America originally freed itself from kings and tyrants, the nation
was all the more vulnerable to demagogues and
conspirators of various kinds. And from Lenin and
Hitler on to various Third World rulers, we have
repeatedly seen how conspirators can seize entire
governments.
But as Peter Knight makes clear, I and others
were wrong decades ago when we thought of “the
paranoid style” as largely an aberration of the past,
now represented by only a few crackpots and
ix

Foreword

extremists ranging from Robert Welch and the
John Birch Society to people like Pat Robertson
and Jerry Falwell. We could not foresee that conspiracy theories, even regarding extraterrestrial
creatures, would become “the lingua franca of
many ordinary Americans.” We could not imagine
what I might now term “the double-agent phenomenon,” in which my own attempt to define a
paranoid response to a make-believe conspiracy
could be perceived itself as part of a new ideological conspiracy! For example, if I produce documents to show that a given conspiracy does not
exist, this may now be interpreted as a cover-up. As
Peter Knight has put it: “Contemporary conspiracy
culture is therefore always poised on the edge of an
infinite abyss of suspicion. The prime-time conspiracy show, The X-Files, stylishly captures the
possibility that we have entered what David Martin’s book on the CIA and the Cold War termed a
‘wilderness of mirrors’ ” (Knight, 27).
Although the cold war heightened awareness of
spies, secret agents, and such governmental plots
as Iran/Contra, the polarization of two Great Powers at least maintained clear boundaries, or pretended to maintain them. The sudden and unexpected collapse of communism and of a socialist
alternative has clearly removed all limits and
restraints for many oligarchs and plutocrats while
also magnifying terrorism and undermining the

x

widespread presumption of historical progress that
emboldened liberals and progressives from the
time of the eighteenth-century Enlightenment.
There is surely much truth to Peter Knight’s conclusion that a world-weary pessimism and cynicism
have created a widespread “default” mood of distrust, preparing so many Americans “to believe the
worst about the world they live in.” As we’ve
moved beyond Orwell’s 1984 and even beyond
Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World, it sometimes
seems that history itself is the greatest conspirator
of all.
David Brion Davis
References
Davis, David Brion. 1960. “Some Themes of
Countersubversion: An Analysis of Anti-Masonic,
Anti-Catholic, and Anti-Mormon Literature.”
Mississippi Valley Historical Review 47:
205–224.
———. 1969. The Slave Power Conspiracy and the
Paranoid Style. Baton Rouge: Louisiana
University Press.
———, ed. 1971. The Fear of Conspiracy: Images of
Un-American Subversion from the Revolution to
the Present. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Hofstadter, Richard. 1967. The Paranoid Style of
American Politics and Other Essays. New York:
Vintage.
Knight, Peter. 2000. Conspiracy Culture: From the
Kennedy Assassination to The X-Files. London
and New York: Routledge.

Preface
Conspiracy theories (and, from time to time, actual
conspiracies) have played a vital role in shaping the
course of American history, from the Puritans to
the present. Although often dismissed as the delusions of extremists, the possibility of a conspiracy
has repeatedly been at center stage in U.S. politics
and culture. From the Revolutionary leaders’ suspicions about British plots to the Anti-Masonic
Party of the 1830s, and from the anticommunism
of the 1950s to the alien abduction narratives of the
1990s, ideas of conspiracy have made a vital contribution, for better or for worse, to the story of U.S.
political life. In short, conspiracy theories are a
popular explanation of the workings of power,
responsibility, and causality in the unfolding of
events. They have appealed to both the Left and
the Right, both the uneducated and intellectuals,
and have been told both by and about those at the
very heart of power. Sometimes they take the form
of racist scapegoating, and at others counterattacks
on the powerful. They have offered alternative
explanations of a vast range of topics, from the economic to the religious, and the political to the cultural. They are sometimes without foundation, and
at others beyond doubt. Moreover, as many commentators agree, conspiracy theories have long
been identified as a peculiarly American obsession.
Although conspiracy theories have always been
an important feature of the national scene, in the
last few decades they have become astonishingly
pervasive in popular culture and politics. Particularly since the political assassinations of the 1960s

and the revelations about the illegal activities of the
intelligence agencies in the 1970s, many people on
the liberal-left have come to see conspiracy as the
normal operating procedure of U.S. government.
At the same time, in recent years there has been a
revival of right-wing fears about the encroaching
influence of federal government and international
organizations. A conspiratorial distrust of both the
government and those outside the “in group” has
been a perennial feature of U.S. politics, but in the
last few decades it has become particularly pressing. Furthermore, the rhetoric of conspiracy has
become part of the lingua franca of everyday
American life and entertainment, from the cult television series The X-Files to the conspiracy-infused
world of the Internet. This encyclopedia puts this
recent flourishing into historical perspective.
Despite the pervasiveness of this culture of conspiracy, it is often difficult for scholars, students, and
general readers to gain accurate and dispassionate
information on both particular episodes and the
overall history of U.S. political conspiracy theories.
This encyclopedia is intended to provide a serious
and comprehensive summary of all the major events,
ideas, and figures of U.S. conspiracy thinking. It
includes entries on both actual conspiracies and
imagined conspiracies (or as far as historians can with
any confidence determine the difference in particular cases). Given that much discussion of conspiracies
is often hotly contested and politically charged, the
aim of the present volume is to offer a rigorous, clearsighted, and concise analysis of each issue. It is
xi

Preface

intended neither to promote nor to dismiss various
conspiracy theories (although some of the contributors make clear where they stand); instead, it places
each item it in a meaningful context.
Organization of the Encyclopedia
This encyclopedia contains three sections. The first
section provides a road map to the topic, with a narrative overview of conspiracies and conspiracy theories in U.S. history, and a summary of different
theoretical approaches to studying the phenomenon. The second section contains alphabetical
entries. These entries set out the historical, intellectual, and political context behind the conspiracy,
conspiracy theory, event, person, or institution in
question; provide (where relevant) a detailed explanation of the theory or episode itself; suggest the
outline (where appropriate) of a critical analysis of
the theory; and finally list references to important

xii

sources and further reading. The final section of the
encyclopedia contains approximately 100 excerpts
(with brief headnotes) from original source documents that illustrate the range of conspiracies and
conspiracy theories in U.S. history.
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank all the contributors who have
made this volume possible, as well as the writers
who gave their permission to include extracts from
their work in the final section. For their enthusiastic support and advice much gratitude is due in
particular to David Brion Davis, Robert Goldberg,
Jeff Pasley, and Larry Schweikart, as well as to Jim
Ciment at ABC-CLIO for proposing the project in
the first instance, and to Lindsay Porter. This encyclopedia is dedicated to Elspeth Alice Porter
Knight.
Peter Knight

Contributors
Niran Abbas
Trinity and All Saints College, UK

James Broderick
New Jersey City University

Donald Altschiller
Boston University

David Brottman
University of Derby, UK

Rolando Avila
University of Texas–Pan American

Jon Brudvig
University of Mary

Enoch Baker
Wayne State University

Michael Hoge Carriere
University of Chicago

Chip Berlet
Political Research Associates

James C. Carrott

Lee Bernstein
San Jose State University

Dennis Castillo
Christ the King Seminary
Jim Ciment

Tania Boster
University of Pittsburgh
Charles Bradshaw
University of Tennessee, Martin
John Braeman
University of Nebraska (retired)
Jack Bratich
University of New Hampshire

Randall Clark
Southern Methodist University
Matthew Cleveland
St. Cloud State University
Michael Cohen
Yale University
Cheryl Collins
University of Virginia

Ron Briley
Sandia Preparatory School
xiii

Contributors

Solomon Davidoff
Gann Academy, Mass.

Robert Goldberg
University of Utah

Karen Gai Dean
University of Ballarat

Larry Gragg
University of Missouri–Rolla

Neil Denslow

Larry Haapanen
Lewis-Clarke State College

James Deutsch
Smithsonian Institution
Craig DiLouie
Journalist and novelist (grandconspiracy.com)
John Drabble
Koc University
Martin Durham
University of Wolverhampton

Angela Hague
Middle Tennessee State University
Michael Hail
Morehead State University
Jeremy Hall
University of Kentucky
Geoff Hamilton
University of Toronto

Tony Elias
JeDon Emenhiser
Humboldt State University
C. Wyatt Evans
Drew University

Ken Harris
University of Canterbury
Mark Harrison
University of Pittsburgh
Dorian Hayes

Wende Feller
SUNY at Albany
Ingrid Walker Fields
Transylvania University
Jim Fisher
Kent State University
James Curtiss Foley
University of Mississippi
Bret Fuller
University of Mississippi
Philippe Girard
McNeese State University

xiv

David Hecht
Harvard University
Don Heidenreich
Lindenwood University
Karen Holleran
Kaplan College
Dave Holloway
University of Derby, UK
Dallas Hulsey
New Mexico Junior College
Markus Hünemörder
University of Munich

Contributors

Jeff Insko
University of Massachusetts, Amherst

Jeffrey Marlett
College of Saint Rose

Timothy Jacobs
Okanagan University College

Francis Mason
King Alfred’s College, UK

James Kimble
George Mason University

Andrew Mathis
Villanova University

John Kimsey
DePaul University

J. Kent McGaughy
Houston Community College

James Kelley
University of Mississippi, Meridian

Chris McHorney
Southwest State University

Kevin Kenny
Boston College

Scott McLemee
Senior Writer, Chronicle of Higher Education

Jeff Kisseloff

Jonathan Mercantini
University of Miami

Marlon Kuzmick
Cornell University
Jennifer Langdon-Teclaw
University of Illinois, Chicago
Amanda Laugesen
Australian National University

Bryan Moore
Arkansas State University
Craig Morris
Journalist (www.petiteplanete.org)
Ken Mullen
Appalachian State University

David Lavery
Middle Tennessee State University

Darren Mulloy

Charles Jason Lee
University of Hertfordshire, UK

Graham Murphy
Seneca College

Marcus LiBrizzi
University of Maine at Machias

Mike O’Connor
University of Texas at Ausin

Dana Luciano
Hamilton College

Niall Palmer
Brunel University, UK

Scott Lupo
California State University, Sacramento

Martin Parker
University of Keele, UK

Graham Macklin

Jon Parmenter
Cornell University
xv

Contributors

Jeff Pasley
University of Missouri

Steve Shay
Washington State University

James Perry

Andrew Silke
University of Leicester

Daniel Pipes
Eithne Quinn
University of Manchester, UK
David Rausch
West Texas A&M University
Gretchen Reilly
Temple College

Philip Simpson
Brevard Community College
Alasdair Spark
King Alfred’s College
Mark Spencer
Huron University College
Margit Stange

Ted Remington
University of Iowa
Michele Ren
Virginia Intermont College
R. Volney Riser
University of Alabama
Matt Robinson
Appalachian State University
Markku Ruotsila
University of Tampere
Margaret Sankey
Auburn University
Christoph Schiessl
Wayne State University
Matt Schoenbachler
Kentucky Wesleyan College

Andrew Strombeck
University of California, Davis
Aissatou Sy-Wonyu
University of Rouen
Bruce Tap
Kenn Thomas
Nicholas Turse
Columbia University
Will Van Arragon
Indiana University, Bloomington
A. Bowdoin Van Riper
Southern Polytechnic State University
Riley Vann
University of Charleston
Jan Voogd

Andrew Schulman
David Weimann
Larry Schweikart
University of Dayton

xvi

Daniel Weimer
Kent State University

Contributors

Thomas White
Historical Society of Western Pennsylvania

Nigel James Woodcock
University of Manchester, UK

Brad Whitsel
Pennsylvania State University

David Zmijewski
Baika Women’s College

xvii

Conspiracy Theories in America:
A Historical Overview
Conspiracy thinking is not U.S. born. The Latin
word conspirare—to breathe together—suggests
both drama and a deeply rooted past. The fear of
conspiracy was a prominent feature on the mental
maps of the first English settlers in the New World.
Early colonists suspected both neighbors and
strangers of secret alliances and dangerous plots.
Subsequent waves of immigrants not only invigorated traditional beliefs, but expanded the pool of
potential conspirators. Well into the twentieth century, Europeans would cue their American kin
about the means and ends of conspiracy and its
perpetrators.
Yet, conspiracy imaging has also adapted and
developed traits reflective of the U.S. environment. It drew life from a sense of mission that convinced Americans of their special role in history.
Rev. Jonathan Edwards explained: “When God is
about to turn the earth into a paradise, he does not
begin his work where there is some growth already,
but in the wilderness” (Cherry, 58). President
Woodrow Wilson was similarly mindful of the holy
mandate. Presenting his League of Nation treaty to
the U.S. Senate in 1919, he announced, “The stage
is set, the destiny disclosed. It has come about by
no plan of our conceiving, but by the hand of God
who led us into this way. We cannot turn back”
(Cherry, 294). God’s people, particularly Protestants, had to be on guard to realize their calling.
Revolutionary success would raise aspirations of
America’s purpose and would also awaken new
conspirators eager to undermine the workings of

the republic at home and abroad. U.S. diversity
contributed energy to the national dynamic, but at
the same time it deepened suspicions of unfamiliar
identities and gnawed at the sense of internal security. Resonating with core values and fueled by ethnic, racial, and religious differences, conspiracy
thinking became a U.S. tradition.
When Puritans disembarked from the Arbella in
1630, they knew that the Massachusetts colony
would soon be a battleground. Their errand into
the wilderness was to raise a Bible commonwealth
devoted to God’s commandments. “The God of
Israel is among us,” Governor John Winthrop
announced, and “we shall be as a city upon a hill,”
offering the model of holiness that would surely
regenerate the world (Winthrop, 38). The Puritans
were just as certain that the enemies of the Lord
were close at hand. Indian peoples, whether
Pequots, Narragansetts, or Wampanoags, became
actors in the supernatural drama, the minions of
Satan who would wage savage war against the visible saints. Battling for the Lord against the Satanic
conspiracy justified cruelty, and atrocities were
common. Even the converted “praying” Indians
could expect little quarter. Contested spaces and
tribal names would change, but the cry of conspiracy, real and imagined, remained constant and
echoed throughout the history of the westward
movement.
If Indian peoples stood outside the walls, Satan
also counted allies within. During the seventeenth
century, New Englanders repeatedly heard and
1

Conspiracy Theories in America: A Historical Overview

believed the accusation of witchcraft, a reminder of
the importance of their holy work. Magistrates
presided over more than 240 cases, reviewing evidence that the Devil was “loose” in Massachusetts.
He had, Boston minister Cotton Mather reported
after consulting the Book of Revelation, “decoyed a
fearful knot of proud, forward, ignorant, envious
and malicious creatures, to list themselves in his
horrid service” (Mather, 80–81). In making their
“Diabolical Compact” with Satan, members of the
“witch gang” were granted supernatural powers to
torment God’s anointed and agitate their communities. Now they gathered at “prodigious witch
meetings,” to “concert and consult” about “the
methods of rooting out the Christian religion from
this country” (Mather, 16, 19, 58, 70). In all, Puritan courts condemned thirty-six women and men
to death. Those who confessed to escape the gallows only fueled the fire of conspiracy thinking.
Events in Salem village in 1691 and 1692
accounted for most of the victims. Over a period of
ten months, forty-eight young girls denounced
mainly isolated, middle-aged women of low social
and economic status for “entertaining” Satan and
attempting to lure them into a conspiracy. Proof of
the plot was abundant. Repeatedly, townspeople
witnessed the torment of the accusers who
shrieked and writhed, tortured by invisible hands.
Salem minister Samuel Parris drew the line
sharply: “Here are but two parties in the world: the
Lamb and his followers, and the dragon and his followers. . . . Here are no neuters. Everyone is on
one side or the other” (Boyer and Nissenbaum,
175). Of the approximately 200 men and women
charged in Salem, 20 were executed.
Witches troubled Americans less in the eighteenth century. New foes were not long in appearing. The citizens of New York City found that the
enemy within the gate was a Trojan horse of their
own making. In 1712, slaves rose in a “bloody conspiracy” to avenge “some hard usage” at the hands
of their masters. Bound by a blood oath and armed
with guns, knives, and hatchets, they set a fire to
lure their white masters into a killing field. For the
nine whites who died, twenty-one blacks were condemned to death: “Some were burnt,” wrote Gov2

ernor Robert Hunter, “others hanged, one broke on
the wheel, and one hung alive in chains. . . .” (Hofstadter and Wallace, 188). Events three decades
later reflect the dance between the real and the
imagined. In 1741, the rumor of black conspiracy
was sufficient cause to hang proactively eighteen
blacks and burn another eleven at the stake. The
fear of slave conspiracies would fire white imaginations for more than a century, with actual plots
swelling the power of countersubversives.
The chant of conspiracy offered the Revolutionary generation both explanation and a spur to
action. Why had the British violated the peace that
so long had characterized imperial-colonial relations? What design could be divined from the
diverse parliamentary measures and taxes passed in
the 1760s and 1770s? American newspaper editors,
politicians, and clergymen searching for a rationale
quickly rejected as groundless the empire’s avowed
defense needs and requirements of administrative
efficiency. More consistent with experience, they
discerned a diabolical and willful pattern to events.
In this, the colonists had learned their lessons well
from England’s opposition leaders and a recent history scarred with Jacobite uprisings and French
conspiracies. Liberty was in danger. Corrupt government ministers, arrogant in their power, were
plotting to destroy the rights of Englishmen and
women. Thomas Jefferson spoke for many: “a
series of oppressions, begun at a distinguished
period and pursued unalterably through every
change of ministers, too plainly prove a deliberate
and systemic plan of reducing us to slavery” (Bailyn, 119–120). When combined with the sense of
American exceptionalism and traditional distrust of
government, the image of conspiracy became vivid.
In linking events, conspiracy thinking accelerated
the rush to revolution.
Still, Americans would only cross the last bridge
to independence when they convinced themselves
that their king was not only aware of the plot, but a
coconspirator. In sealing the connection, Thomas
Jefferson enshrined conspiracy in the Declaration
of Independence, proclaiming the people’s right to
revolution “when a long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces

Conspiracy Theories in America: A Historical Overview

a design to reduce them under absolute despotism.” Americans more steeped in the Bible’s Book
of Revelation would go further, identifying King
George III as the Antichrist. They had discovered
that the numerical conversion of the Hebrew and
Greek translations of “royal supremacy in Great
Britain” totaled 666. Across the Atlantic Ocean,
British ministers similarly talked conspiracy to
explain the changing fortunes of empire. Even the
king was convinced that he had been the victim of
a “desperate conspiracy” (Gruber, 370).
Conspiracy thinking did not abate when the
British threat was turned aside. In the 1780s and
1790s, a struggle for control of the new republic
played out in conspiratorial charge and countercharge. Political activists who curried favor by
imagining their opponents as aristocratic counterrevolutionaries were tarred in reply as demagogic
proponents of “mobocracy.” Shays’ Rebellion, the
conflict over the ratification of the Constitution,
and the Whiskey Rebellion provided abundant
grist for countersubversives in an age flush with
conspiracy explanations.
Nor was America immune to new foreign contagions. Particularly insidious to New England Federalists was the Order of the Illuminati, a secret
society of free thinkers that preached resistance to
state authority and vowed to destroy ecclesiastical
power. Birthed in Bavaria in 1776 by professor of
law Adam Weishaupt, the Illuminati was said to
have penetrated France by means of the secret
Freemason fraternal order and then engineered
the French Revolution. The Order sighted the
United States as the next target. Rev. Jedidiah
Morse was among the first to sound the alarm,
warning that “the world was in the grip of a secret
revolutionary conspiracy” (Camp, 32). In words
that were echoed during the red scare of the 1950s,
Morse convinced listeners: “I now have in my possession complete and indubitable proof . . . an official, authenticated list of the names, ages, places of
nativity, [and] professions of the officers and members of a society of Illuminati” (Johnson, 61).
Congress acted in the wake of the Illuminati scare
and amid concerns that French intrigues in national
politics had, in President John Adams’s words, placed

America “in a hazardous and afflictive position”
(Stauffer, 229). In the summer of 1798 it passed the
Alien Act, which authorized the president to arrest
and expel foreign nationals involved “in any treasonable or secret machinations against the government.” The Sedition Act followed, limiting the freedoms of speech and press and setting fines and
terms of imprisonment for those who “unlawfully
combine or conspire together with intent to oppose
any measure or measures of the government” (Commager, 176–178). The threat did not match the
response; the new republic would prove less fragile
than its creators assumed. Somewhat more substantive was the abortive plot of Vice-President Aaron
Burr to split the western territories from the United
States. This scheme, too, would hardly break the
surface of U.S. history.
Concerns about the Freemasons reappeared in
the 1820s. In the “age of the common man,” a rapidly growing, exclusive, secret society ran counter to
a prevailing ideology that rejected privilege and pretensions of superior status. The republic must be
saved, proclaimed Vermont anti-Mason Edward
Barber, from a “haughty aristocracy,” a “monster”
that has sunk its “fangs into the bosom of the Constitution” (Goodman, 24). Suspicion ignited activism
in 1826 when a New York Mason, William Morgan,
who threatened to expose the secrets of his order,
was kidnapped and murdered. Authorities were
unable to solve the crime, sparking rumors that fraternal discipline had held them in check and allowed
the guilty to escape justice. This touched off a mass
movement that spread to New England and the
Midwest and launched the first third party in U.S.
history, the Anti-Masonic Party. The future was in
the balance. Freemasonry, General William Wadsworth revealed, was the master plot: “ . . . every revolution and conspiracy which had agitated Europe
for the last fifty years may be distinctly traced [to it],
and the secret workings of this all pervading order
can be clearly seen” (Bernard, 430). Among the
prominent Americans supporting the anti-Masonic
movement were John Quincy Adams, William Lloyd
Garrison, and Thurlow Weed.
Concurrent with the anti-Masonic furor, Americans added Mormons to the company of plotters.
3

Conspiracy Theories in America: A Historical Overview

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
was one of several U.S.-born sects that emerged
from a region of New York burnt over by repeating
waves of religious enthusiasm. It was not the
preaching of communitarianism and End Times
prophecy that differentiated Mormons in U.S.
eyes, or their claim as the one true church. Rather,
it was the vengeance of Mormon enterprise in
building their city of God. Americans imagined
Mormons as soldiers who moved in lockstep to the
command of their prophet Joseph Smith. Converts
to Mormonism seemed to have escaped from freedom, obeying orders to vote as a bloc and pooling
financial resources for the church’s good. The
prophet’s revival of the practice of polygamy
affronted moral sensibilities and made the situation
more urgent. A broad coalition of religious, political, and economic opponents forced the saints to
flee New York, Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois, with
haven finally found in Utah. Fear of the “Mormon
Power” and its “ecclesiastical despotism” would not
be quieted for decades and could still be felt at the
end of the nineteenth century. Perhaps a reflection
of the true Americanism of the church, the index of
the Book of Mormon contains one-half page of
citations for “secret combinations” with appended
supplementary references.
Even more appalling to Protestant Americans
was the papist plot that flared in the decades
before the Civil War. The “tyrant of the Tiber” had
for centuries proven a tenacious adversary. Now he
renewed the assault and “the cloven foot of this
subtle foreign heresy,” warned Samuel F. B. Morse,
inventor of the telegraph and son of Rev. Jedidiah
Morse, was pressing upon the neck of Protestant
America (Morse, 89). Nativists accused Catholics
of placing their allegiance to the pope above their
loyalty to the United States. Catholics, enslaved by
the secrets they had disclosed in the confessional,
were herded to the polls and voted as commanded.
Once the Catholic hierarchy had control of government, it would end the separation of church and
state, ban the Bible, and destroy the freedoms of
press, speech, and religion. The Irish immigration
was an essential component of the papal conspiracy. Here were the foot soldiers of the pope’s cru4

sade, ready to bully Protestants into submission
while voting Catholics to power.
Fears of Masons, Mormons, and Catholics faded
as the North and South drifted apart and toward
civil war. In making sense of decades of sectional
conflict rooted in economic difference and ideological divergence, leaders on both sides of the
Mason-Dixon line found comfort in conspiracy
thinking. Their newspapers, sermons, and stump
speeches cut subversive images in bold relief,
recasting the unintentional and coincidental as
malevolent premeditation. Both northerners and
southerners, finding these signals consistent with
traditional beliefs and fears, were receptive and
used them to assert sectional identities and mobilized energies for struggle. In a cycle of action and
reaction, conspiracy charges frayed and eventually
tore the bonds of union.
In the late 1830s abolitionists, opposing slavery
as an immoral institution that robbed blacks of
their humanity, initiated the attack on the slave
power conspiracy. Large plantation owners and
slaveholders, the “slaveocracy,” were leveraging
their wealth and power to intimidate the federal
government and advance the slavery evil. These
“Lords of the Lash,” in league with the northern
monied “Lords of the Loom,” cried Wendell
Phillips, had plotted slavery’s expansion by annexing Texas, provoking the Mexican War, and organizing filibustering expeditions to secure new lands
in Latin America (Nye, 80). In the 1850s, the abolitionists were joined in countersubversion by the
more numerous antislavery activists. Unlike abolitionists who opposed slavery because of its consequences for black people, they focused on the slave
power’s conspiracy against white northerners. If
not conspiracy, how could a long history of abuse
of constitutional rights be explained? The House of
Representatives’ Gag Rule restricting the right
of petition, mob attacks on the freedoms of speech
and press, the banning of antislavery literature
from the mails, and unwarranted searches in southern cities revealed the hidden hand raised against
antislavery advocates. “Incidents are no longer
incidents,” concluded antislavery proponent
Stephen Embro. “They are links in the chain of

Conspiracy Theories in America: A Historical Overview

demonstration, infallible, plain, conclusive” (Gienapp, 362).
The slave power also posed an economic threat.
Western land beckoned to white yeomen farmers,
offering a ladder of mobility. Yet without territorial
curbs on the plantation system, the promise of economic opportunity was empty; northern farmers
knew they could not compete against slave labor.
The slaveocracy, however, would not accept
restraints for it demanded virgin soil for cotton
production and new markets for a surplus slave
population. New slave states also maintained
southern parity in the U.S. Senate and balanced
the northern-dominated House of Representatives. Cunningly, slaveholders concealed their territorial ambitions behind a plan to build a transcontinental railroad and with northern confederates
passed the Kansas-Nebraska Act. This legislation
repealed the Missouri Compromise that had
restricted slavery’s domain for thirty years. Land
long closed to the advance of slavery had now
opened. A sense of betrayal ignited indignation in
meetings across the North. From these emerged
the Republican Party, which stood on a platform of
free soil, free labor, free men. Three years later, the
Supreme Court’s Dred Scott decision prohibited
Congress and its agents from restricting slavery in
the territories. Many, including Abraham Lincoln,
were convinced that the conspiracy had reached
the highest levels of government. Powerful foes
had besieged the Constitution and the northern
economic future and northerners would surrender
neither without a fight. The bloody war that followed would firm them in conspiracy thinking.
Surely, Abraham Lincoln’s death by conspiracy in
the final act of the Civil War was their irrefutable
proof.
White southerners took pride in a distinctive way
of life; Dixie was the land of large mansion houses
where cotton was king. Slavery was their foundation and whites were convinced that it was Godgiven, scientifically sanctioned, and uniquely productive. The antislavery movement thus
challenged the core of their community. Whether
they owned slaves or not, the majority of southerners were determined to resist the threat to law,

property, and racial order. But the danger of
“incendiary” abolitionist literature touched deeper
fears. While they persuaded themselves that slaves
were happy and docile, southerners armed for their
lives in preparation for black insurrection. Those
who spoke in countersubversive tones did not lack
for examples. In spinning the incidents of conspiracy into a tight web, the South built solidarity and
resolve. At the same time, it lost perspective and
created a menace out of scale and more cohesive
than the evidence allowed.
Southern newspapers were heavy with news of
the conspiracy against slavery. North of the divide,
men and women appeared to move collectively in
disobedience to the fugitive slave laws and protection of the underground railroad conspiracy. Who
promoted the publication of Uncle Tom’s Cabin and
then financed its stage production? How could the
Republican Party advance so quickly? John Brown’s
attempt to seize the government arsenal at Harper’s
Ferry and incite slave insurrection could not have
been planned and executed without an extended
family of plotters. Southerners were certain that the
wave of support that swept the North and raised
Brown to heroic rank was manufactured and clear
evidence of collusion. The danger was homegrown
as well. In 1822, South Carolina authorities uncovered Denmark Vesey’s conspiracy and executed
thirty-seven slaves. At least three slaves were convicted and hanged for the Charleston, South Carolina, Fire Scare of 1825–1826, during which a
number of the city’s wooden buildings were
torched. The bloodiest uprising occurred in Virginia
in 1831. Sixty whites perished in Nat Turner’s rebellion and seventy slaves were summarily executed. A
traumatized South would subsequently flinch at the
very hint of black unrest. By 1861, the South had
become an armed camp prepared to defend itself
from enemies within and without.
Countersubversion continued to permeate
national debate as the United States industrialized
in the second half of the nineteenth century. While
the Civil War did much to douse conspiracy thinking
rooted in North/South sectionalism, the rise of the
Ku Klux Klan in the South reflected the persistence
of prewar patterns. Klansmen recast Reconstruction
5

Conspiracy Theories in America: A Historical Overview

legislation into a Radical Republican intrigue to turn
slaves into masters and “Africanize” the South. The
Klan conspiracy against federal policy would claim
almost 1,000 lives, both black and white. A tough
federal response smothered Klan terror in a wave of
prosecutions. Martial law and the suspension of
habeas corpus were necessary to remove the threat
from South Carolina. In 1915, the Hollywood spectacular Birth of a Nation would reframe historical
events to give credence to the Klan’s conspiratorial
interpretation.
As the economic order changed, different
visions of the future battled for power. Conspiracy
would be a prominent theme in the competition.
Capitalists denounced radicals for scheming to
overthrow the government and cited as proof
events like the Haymarket Square bombing in 1886
that left seven policemen dead. The radical
response counted strikebreakers, Pinkerton detectives, and blacklists, among other union-busting
tactics, on the roll of robber baron sins. Novelists
like Ignatius Donnelly painted the conflict more
vividly. In his book Caesar’s Column, published in
1890, Donnelly described the Brotherhood of
Destruction, a secret society that rises to destroy
the “abominable despotism” of the Hebrew-dominated aristocracy that has brought “the universal
misery and wretchedness of the working class . . .”
(Donnelly, 45, 124). The Populist Party platform of
1892 put U.S. economic problems in perspective,
charging that “a vast conspiracy against mankind
has been organized on two continents, and it is rapidly taking possession of the world” (Commager,
143). The intrigue between Wall Street and European banking houses would await more explicit
description in the twentieth century.
Economic plots did not replace traditional
intrigues. Indian rebellions in the West, culminating in the Ghost Dance Movement of the 1890s,
nourished white conspiracy thinking. Catholics’
allegiance to the pope still exposed them to Protestant charges of dual loyalty. A rising tide of immigration from southern and eastern Europe brought
fresh troops to papist forces and raised new fears.
In the 1890s, the American Protective Association
would draw over half a million Americans to its
6

anti-Catholic banner with promises to curb immigration and fight papal power in politics. Nativists
discerned the new immigrants’ complicity in other
nefarious undertakings. Their drinking habits fed
the arrogant “Liquor Power,” which prohibitionists
charged with fixing prices, bribing judges, and controlling the “ballot box via the rum hole” (Ostrander, 66). Meanwhile, corrupt political machines, in
league with the saloon menace, tightened their
hold on city government with immigrant votes.
Conspiracy thinking spilled over into the new
century. Progressive Era muckraking journalists,
seeking to spur reform and sell magazines, published sensational and lurid exposés of a diversity of
ills plaguing the United States. They targeted the
white slave trade, corrupt labor unions, sweatshop
abuses, child labor horrors, cover-ups of foul practices in the beef industry, and patent medicine
scams. Their pens revealed that business conspiracies in restraint of trade barely scratched the surface of corporate treachery. Corruption even
tainted the U.S. Senate. Certainly, the insinuation
or discovery of secret deals and hidden cabals that
gave their stories a conspiratorial spin enhanced
the muckrakers’ appeal.
The entry of the United States into World War I
doubled the guard against conspiracy. Hyphenated
Americans were suspect, and Germans in particular
were the focus of national fears. Former president
Theodore Roosevelt worried about German Americans but had a more expansive view of the danger,
refusing to define the menace by ethnicity. Thus, he
netted U.S. senators who opposed intervention, dissenting native-born Americans, and the Hearst
newspapers, which he accused of “play[ing] the
Kaiser’s game.” Roosevelt wrote: “The Hun within
our gates is the worst of the foes of our own household. . . . Whether he is pro-German, or poses as a
pacifist, or a peace-at-any-price man, matters little.
He is the enemy of the United States” (Roosevelt,
293–294). Disfranchisement and the establishment
of internment camps were his solutions to the
domestic threat. Some would dismiss this response
as too lenient.
The radical Industrial Workers of the World
(IWW or Wobblies) was considered even more dan-

Conspiracy Theories in America: A Historical Overview

gerous. Already suspect for its rhetoric of sabotage
and class struggle, the IWW’s opposition to a war
for capitalists’ profits drew the fire of government
authorities, opinion makers, and local vigilantes.
The Department of Justice quickly confronted
“Imperial Wilhelm’s Warriors,” staging nationwide
raids on IWW branches in September 1917 and
arresting Wobblies for conspiracy to disrupt the war
effort and antidraft agitation. On trial in Chicago,
101 IWW leaders faced charges of 17,500 offenses,
with guilty verdicts sending thirty-five Wobblies to
Levenworth Penitentiary for five years, thirty-three
for ten years, and fifteen for twenty years. Later trials brought seventy-three more convictions. In all,
more than 2,000 Wobblies, socialists, and pacifists
were trapped in the World War I witch-hunt that
transformed dissent into subversion.
The pressure on dissidents did not ease during
the red scare that followed the war. Bolshevik pleas
to the workers of the world to throw off their chains
and uproot the capitalist system had spurred U.S.
resistance to the coming revolution. Prominent
among those fanning the fears of conspiracy was
Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer, who hoped to
ride the antiradical wave into the White House. The
danger, claimed Palmer, was extreme: “Like a
prairie-fire, the blaze of revolution was sweeping
over every American institution of law and
order. . . . It was eating its way into the homes of the
American workman, its sharp tongues of revolutionary heat were licking the altars of the churches,
leaping into the belfry of the school bell, crawling
into the secret corners of American homes.” Palmer
found the nucleus of the conspiracy in a “small
clique of outcasts from the East Side of New York”
who were “under the criminal spell of Trotzky [sic]
and Lenin” (Palmer, 174, 175, 180). In response, he
created within the Justice Department a Bureau of
Investigation charged with gathering information
on all domestic radicals. Under J. Edgar Hoover’s
direction, a file index of 60,000 names was compiled. In November and December 1919 agents
without arrest warrants organized coast-to-coast
raids and jailed alleged radicals. In January 1920
more than 4,000 suspected communists were seized
in coordinated raids in thirty-three cities.

A revived Ku Klux Klan waved the banner of
countersubversion in the 1920s. Unlike the Klan of
the post–Civil War years, this hooded movement
was not primarily southern or terrorist. Preaching a
multifaceted program based upon law and order,
“100 Percent Americanism,” and militant Protestantism, it enlisted nationally perhaps as many as
six million men and women with the most powerful klaverns organized in Indiana, Colorado, Ohio,
Texas, Illinois, Pennsylvania, and California. In
recruiting members, the Klan resurrected the
specter of the Catholic conspiracy. The word again
went out that the pope’s puppets were preparing to
advance their holy cause. On another front, the
papists schemed to ruin the quality of the public
schools and Romanize students by placing
Catholics on school boards and employing them as
teachers. “In the event of their success,” wrote
Klan sympathizer Alma White, “there would be a
string of beads around every Protestant child’s neck
and a Roman Catholic catechism in his hand. ‘Hail
Mary, Mother of God,’ would be on every child’s
lips and the idolatrous worship of dead saints a part
of the daily program” (White 1925, 26).
The Klan recruiters exploited antisemitism, long
a tradition in Europe and kindled in the United
States by the immigration of two million Jews from
Russia and Eastern Europe. Numbers alone heightened suspicion, but most provocative to Americans
was an expanding Jewish economic and political
sphere. Scornful of American values, the Jews
planned to undermine Protestant hegemony. Wellorganized “Hebrew syndicates” forced Protestants
from positions of economic power. The motion picture industry, considered an early victim of the
Jews, was seen as producing debauching films,
commercializing the Sabbath, and luring Protestants from churches. Protestant women were
warned of the lascivious Jews, “men in whose characters animal passions and greed are the predominant forces” (White 1928, 34). Some even believed
that Jewish financiers were aiding the pope in the
scheme to disinherit Protestant Americans.
Automobile manufacturer and U.S. folk hero
Henry Ford corroborated the Klan’s charges
against the Jews. Ford based his ideas on the Pro7

Conspiracy Theories in America: A Historical Overview

tocols of the Elders of Zion, an account fabricated
by the czarist secret police at the turn of the century of an alleged Jewish conspiracy against Christianity. To spread the word, Ford published the
Protocols’ claims in his newspaper the Dearborn
Independent for ninety-one consecutive weeks and
then compiled them in book form. He also Americanized the Jewish “program” for his readers: Darwinism, Bolshevism, control of the liquor traffic
and prostitution, political machines, the spread of
jazz, and the corruption of baseball. According to
Ford, Jews were also guilty of dominating the slave
trade and manipulating the South into secession in
1861, and he detected the Jewish hand in the
recent world war: “International financiers are
behind all wars. They are what is called the international Jew: German Jews, French Jews, English
Jews, American Jews. I believe that in all those
countries except our own the Jewish financier is
supreme . . . here the Jew is a threat” (qtd. in Lee,
13). Jews were thus especially cunning for they not
only ruled the world’s economy, but with communism had mastered the proletariat. He even discovered that the traitor Benedict Arnold had Jewish
associates and that the Rothschilds had financed
the Hessians.
The Great Depression gave conspiracy thinking
an economic twist, but involved the now usual suspects. At first, conspiracy theorists like radio priest
Father Charles Coughlin blamed “plutocrats,” and
“money-changers,” and other members of the economic elite for planning the crash: “The sands of
intrigue and of evil machinations have filtered
through the hour glass of their control” (Kazin,
119). Soon they borrowed from Henry Ford and
Adolf Hitler. As outlined in the Protocols of the
Elders of Zion, the Jews had brought economic ruin
and were a step closer to world domination. The
“Jew Deal” of President Franklin Roosevelt, born
Rosenfeld, was not America’s salvation but a continuation of the plot. With the support of mainstream
business and political leaders, William Pelley of the
Silver Shirts and Gerald L. K. Smith joined Coughlin in bringing charges of Jewish perfidy.
Domestic plotters did double duty in foreign
intrigues. Revisionists reexamined the origins of
8

U.S. involvement in World War I and replaced
Wilsonian idealism with cynical manipulation. Isolationists in the 1930s alleged that the public had
been tricked into war by munitions makers and
bankers anxious to protect their investments and to
profit from the carnage. Not surprisingly, North
Dakota Senator Gerald Nye’s committee charged
with reviewing the arms business found that the
“merchants of death” had grown wealthy on war.
Public opinion, however, took no note of obvious
consequences, but instead confirmed conspiracy.
Only a small leap in logic would be necessary to
find Jewish fingerprints on the plot and revise it to
fit current events.
The Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor closed
the debate on intervention, but released new fears
of conspiracy. Did President Roosevelt back-door
the United States into the war against Germany by
manipulating the Japanese into firing the first shot
in the Pacific? Why did Washington delay in warning Pearl Harbor of the impending attack? Were
Hawaii commanders Admiral Husband Kimmel
and General Walter Short dismissed to cover up
the plot? Charles Beard, who spiced his book on
the constitutional convention with suggestions of
elite intrigue, waded into the controversy early.
Avoiding words like “conspiracy” and “plot,” Beard
nevertheless exposed presidential calculation. Roosevelt and Secretary of State Cordell Hull, he
wrote, “were expecting if not actively seeking war;
and having this expectation, they continued to
‘maneuver’ the Japanese and awaited the denouement” (Beard, 566). The prestige of Beard’s prior
work and the Yale University Press imprint gave his
charges weight. Military comrades of Kimmel and
Short came to their defense and blamed Washington for withholding vital information from Pearl
Harbor despite having broken the Japanese diplomatic code. They also found it curious that U.S. aircraft carriers were conveniently away on maneuvers and out of harm’s way on the day of the attack.
Suspicious to other revisionists was the delay in
opening the official investigation, the suppression
of its findings for ten months, and then the final
release of the report in 1945 with fifty-two pages
withheld. During the cold war, critics who accused

Conspiracy Theories in America: A Historical Overview

Roosevelt of being soft on communism alleged that
Pearl Harbor was sacrificed to ensure U.S. involvement in Europe and save his Russian pals. Most
recently, John Toland has claimed that “The comedy of errors on the sixth and seventh [of December 1941] appears incredible. It only makes sense if
it was a charade, and Roosevelt and the inner circle had known about the attack” (Toland, 321).
Leftists were similarly prone to conspiracy thinking. U.S. communists, like their counterparts in
Moscow, repeatedly decried the international capitalist plot to destroy the Soviet Union and the proletariat’s vanguard. The subsequent Soviet alliance
with the United States and Great Britain during
World War II did little to ease concerns. Communists questioned Allied strategy, which delayed the
opening of a second front against the Nazis in
France until 1944 while the Soviets bore the brunt
of the fighting. Asked party leaders: Was this a capitalist trick to bleed Russia white and leave her too
weak to resist postwar imperialism?
Among the most vocal in crying conspiracy were
federal authorities. Franklin Roosevelt set the
administration’s tone, denouncing opponents of his
foreign policy as “appeaser fifth columnists” in the
service of a totalitarian world conspiracy
(Horowitz, 185). He summoned J. Edgar Hoover
of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and charged
him with gathering information on the activities of
U.S. fascists and Communists. Zealous FBI agents,
on cue from their director and Justice Department
prosecutors, fashioned a dragnet to trap prominent
anti-Semites and right-wingers like Gerald Winrod,
William Pelley, Lawrence Dennis, and Elizabeth
Dilling. They and twenty-six others were indicted
and tried for conspiracy to encourage insubordination in the armed forces and violation of the Smith
Act, which made it illegal for anyone to advocate or
even belong to an organization that advocated the
overthrow by force of the U.S. government. This
case ended in mistrial and the defendants were
freed, but the government had exacted punishment in lost time and resources. Only Pelley, who
in a previous trial had been found guilty of conspiracy to impair the war effort, would serve time
in prison.

The federal government was more successful in
its countersubversive action against Japanese Americans. In February 1942, President Franklin Roosevelt issued Executive Order 9066, removing all
Japanese Americans living on the West Coast to
relocation camps in the interior. Guilty only by reason of ethnicity, 112,000 men, women, and children
saw their liberties sacrificed to regional and national
fears, both latent and current. California Attorney
General Earl Warren, who would later serve as
chief justice of the United States Supreme Court,
made the case for evacuation. “I believe,” he testified, “that . . . the greatest danger to continental
United States is that from well-organized sabotage
and fifth-column activity.” He reported that a
review of California landownership maps revealed
“that it is more than just accident” that Japanese
Americans had settled near airplane factories, manufacturing plants, dams, railroads, power lines,
sugar refineries, and air bases. The absence of evidence of disloyalty or sabotage was, in fact, proof of
their treachery: “I believe we are just being lulled
into a false sense of security. . . . When, nobody
knows of course, but we are approaching an invisible deadline” (Warren 11011–11012, 11018).
Although challenged, the Supreme Court would
uphold the presidential order and the countersubversive reasoning on which it was based.
In the second half of the twentieth century, the
alarm of U.S. countersubversion grew louder and
more insistent. A chorus of messengers gave warning, their pleas for defense merging, resonating,
and reinforcing. Ignoring few leads, believers
made conspiratorial puzzle pieces of Marilyn Monroe, Malcolm X, Martin Luther King, Robert
Kennedy, Vietnam POWs, the moon landing,
Watergate, Bill Clinton, Princess Diana, Y2K, and
even the “man shortage” of the 1980s. In this context, five major plot lines drew legions of theorists,
generated large media shares, and won significant
mainstream support. They were the “Master” conspiracy that birthed the New World Order, the rise
of the Antichrist, the assassination of President
John F. Kennedy, the plot against black America,
and the UFO incident at Roswell. The cries of
these conspiracy theorists were especially urgent
9

Conspiracy Theories in America: A Historical Overview

for they were convinced that time was running out
for the United States. The plotters had not only
breached the walls of key institutions, but had
taken control.
In the immediate postwar years, U.S. foreign
policy setbacks and Communist advances in
Europe and Asia gave opportunity to those who
saw a conspiracy behind events. Led by Republican
Party leaders, large numbers of Americans became
certain that undercover Soviet agents and their
sympathizers had infiltrated libraries, schools, universities, the motion picture industry, and even the
highest levels of the federal government. With the
lessening of cold war tensions and the election of
Dwight Eisenhower to the presidency in 1952,
public fears subsided. Some, however, believed
that the threat had merely gone underground and
thus had become more dangerous. This was the
contention of businessman Robert Welch, who
organized the ultra-right John Birch Society in
1959, vowing to roust hidden Communists who
continued to undermine the United States from
within.
In the 1960s, Welch revealed to his followers
that his focus on Communist intrigue was misplaced; communism was merely a subplot of the
“Master” conspiracy. He fingered the descendants
of Adam Weishaupt and his Illuminati as the conspirators who sought to conquer the world.
Financiers, government leaders, socialists, liberals,
and Communists were merely pawns of an “inner
core of conspiratorial power” whose members
were “cunning and ruthless” and their reach
“worldwide” (Welch, 3). Concealed behind their
puppets, the identities of these “Insiders” were
unknown even to Welch. With tentacles in international banking and trade, national political parties,
and influential newspapers, the plotters engineered revolution, assassination, war, and depression to speed them to global dictatorship. Other
manifestations of the plot were a rising divorce
rate, birth control, pornography, civil rights agitation, and the fluoridation of water supplies. The
United States was in the Insiders’ grasp, claimed
Welch, and soon to become a province of what he
called in 1972 the “New World Order.”
10

Birch Society members spread the alarm, narrowing the search for the Insiders to the members
of the internationalist Council on Foreign Relations and Trilateral Commission. Books, pamphlets, film, talk radio, and the Internet carried the
message to the grass roots and by the end of the
century members of militia units, Aryan Nations,
the Ku Klux Klan, and skinhead brotherhoods had
made the cause their own. In their hands, the conspiracy became another Jewish attempt to control
the world. While mainstream Americans did not
feel the intensity of these countersubversives, they
had learned to be vigilant at the very mention of
the New World Order.
The secular crusade against the New World
Order drew strength from a conspiracy theory
steeped in biblical imagery. Since the seventeenth
century, Christian Americans have attempted to
decode the Book of Revelation and discern not
only the timing of Jesus’ Second Coming, but signs
of the advent of the Antichrist or “beast.” After
World War II, believers were sure that their generation had been chosen to see the cosmic drama
unfold. Fixing attention was biblical prophecy
become history when Jews ended their 2,000-year
exile to reclaim Israel in 1948 and then capture
Jerusalem in 1967. The faithful were alerted and
knew the meaning of other signs—the worship of
“false Christs,” lawlessness, violent storms, and
intense earthquakes. Clearly, the millennium was
at the door.
Taking his cue from those who exposed the Master conspiracy, Rev. Pat Robertson, founder of the
Christian Coalition, spied the Antichrist lurking in
the shadows, readying the Council on Foreign Relations and the Trilateral Commission as his vehicles
to global power. Said Robertson, “He will be like a
combination of Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, Genghis
Khan, Mao Tse-Tung, and other dictators who have
butchered millions of people.” The Antichrist,
Robertson warned in 1984, was on the march in the
United States: “The demons have what are called
‘principalities and powers.’ It is possible that a
demon prince is in charge of New York, Detroit,
and St. Louis” (Robertson, 116, 155). Others were
convinced that the “mark” of the beast was already

Conspiracy Theories in America: A Historical Overview

affixed on the universal price code, smart cards,
ATMs, microchip implants, and fiber optics.
Rev. Jerry Falwell, writer Hal Lindsey, and
scores of conspiracy-minded evangelicals echoed
Robertson, offering Rapture as the escape hatch to
born-again Christians who sought to avoid the
Tribulation reign of the beast. Their calls for
repentance grew more intense as the countdown to
the year 2000 approached, because they knew it
had cosmic significance. The failure of the new
millennium to end history did not break evangelical momentum. Eyes were now on 2007, the
2,000th anniversary of Christ’s crucifixion and resurrection. Evangelists continue to sow seeds, opening more than 200 millennial websites, generating
scores of new books and audio- and videotapes,
and even producing full-length motion pictures
that dramatize the End Times scenario.
The assassination of President John F. Kennedy
in November 1963 may be the most intensively
studied event in U.S. history. It is flush with detail
and offers hundreds of eyewitnesses, extensive ballistics evidence and autopsy results, and even a film
that frames action to the split second. Bibliographies now count more than 3,000 entries, including
films, plays, television programs, and a dozen
newsletters. Conspiracy thinking permeates most
of these efforts. Born of bereavement and drawing
strength from the memory of a lost Camelot, conspiracy theories challenge the conclusion of the
official account that indicted a lone gunman. Once
conspiracists were convinced that they had exposed
the cover-up, new theories and a counterhistory
appeared. The assassination, they contend, was
actually a coup d’état that robbed the nation of its
future. Filmmaker Oliver Stone made the case in
the motion picture JFK, released in 1991. Stone
has the furtive character “X” reveal the conspiracy,
tracing it to the White House, CIA, FBI, and the
“military-industrial complex.” Kennedy had to go
because “he wanted to call off the moon race in
favor of cooperation with the Soviets. He signed a
treaty with the Soviets to ban nuclear testing, he
refused to invade Cuba in ’62, and he set out to
withdraw from Vietnam. But that all ended on
November 22, 1963” (Stone, 112).

Opinion surveys repeatedly testify to the success
of countersubversive arguments, showing that for
the large majority of Americans an assassination
conspiracy is the conventional wisdom. The hold of
conspiracy on the public mind was so great that a
congressionally mandated commission created in
the 1990s to declassify four million pages of documents could not close the case. The “magic bullet”
and the “grassy knoll,” conspiracy’s shorthand
terms, remained fixed in the national lexicon.
Some groups in modern America were especially
prone to conspiracy thinking. Disproportionately
among the vigilant were African Americans. Polls
found that more than 60 percent of African Americans believed that the CIA had flooded their
neighborhoods with drugs and one-third were convinced that government scientists had created the
AIDS virus to ensure black genocide. On the
streets, word passed that the Ku Klux Klan or the
federal government had placed chemicals in food
and drink to render black men sterile. Collaterally,
opinion surveys have consistently shown that
African Americans are twice as likely as whites to
harbor strong biases against Jews.
For blacks whose place in U.S. society is often precarious, conspiracism not only offers self-protection
and empowerment but reiterates shared values and
asserts a collective defense. Conspiracy thinking has
also been used as a weapon in the struggle for
power in the black community. Most striking, it has
been instrumental in the quest for authority of the
Nation of Islam and particularly its leader Louis
Farrakhan. Farrakhan rallied support by confirming
the conspiracy: “They’re using chemical weapons,
biological warfare, germ warfare already on black
people. AIDS is not an accident any more than
small pox was an accident with the Indians. Sending
them blankets and killing them with disease. . . .
You need to wake up and see that your life is threatened” (Gardell, 327). He detected, as well, a secret
hand behind ghetto violence: “The Uzis, the AK47s, your enemy is feeding you automatic weapons
now. You don’t make weapons, Brother. Where did
you get the weapons? . . . This is all calculated. This
is all part of the conspiracy” (Farrakhan). Farrakhan’s rhetoric of countersubversion is a call to
11

Conspiracy Theories in America: A Historical Overview

battle that identifies friends and targets foes while
marking off the distance from rival leaders and
groups. Uncompromising before white power and
its alleged black lackeys, Farrakhan and the Nation
of Islam appear the community’s most defiant and
effective advocates, making them immune to challenge from within.
For those who believe that the earth has been
visited by extraterrestrials, the Roswell incident is
the holy grail, and many have joined in the search,
making it the most studied event in UFO history.
According to researchers, an alien craft crashed
outside of Roswell, New Mexico, in 1947 and the
federal government recovered the bodies of four
extraterrestrials. Enhancing the drama of this story
is the theme of conspiracy. Believers argue that
Majestic 12 (MJ-12), a secret group within the federal government, is engaged in a plot to cover up
the evidence of extraterrestrial contact. The number of individuals engaged in the conspiracy is
large and the effort ongoing and thorough. According to authors Kevin Randle and Don Schmitt:
“Files were altered. So were personnel records,
along with assignments and various codings and
code words. Changing serial numbers ensured that
those searching later would not be able to locate
those who were involved in the recovery. The trail
was being carefully altered” (Goldberg, 200).
Meanwhile, the plot continues with the federal
authorities conspiring to discredit Roswell activists
and deceive the public.
Roswell was, moreover, only the first instance of
deception, setting the pattern for official denials
about UFO sightings, abductions, cattle mutilations,
crop circles, and even hidden alien bases. The story
has been well packaged for popular consumption,
but it was mainstream media experts who ensured
that Roswell and these other signs of extraterrestrial
contact spread from the community of UFO believers to a wider public. By the fiftieth anniversary of
the Roswell incident in 1997, tabloids, cable television, and motion pictures had made the UFO phenomenon and Roswell not only icons of conspiracy
but staples of U.S. popular culture.
This brief survey spotlights the centrality and
persistence of conspiracy thinking in U.S. history.
12

Since their arrival, Americans have positioned
themselves defensively to repel subversives—
supernatural, extraterrestrial, and mundane. While
repeatedly under siege, the perimeter holds fast
and dangerous outsiders remain at bay. Sometimes, as in the 1850s, 1930s, and today, conspiracy
theorists are convinced that the enemy has penetrated key institutions. Conspiracy thinking draws
power by merging with and reinforcing traditional
American values and beliefs: a sense of mission,
Protestant supremacy, concern about encroachments on liberty, antielitism, maintenance of the
racial order, and the sanctity of private property. In
the midst of diversity, conspiracy theories nurture
a sense of peoplehood while discovering the enemies of the American dream. The exposure of real
plotters, meanwhile, acts to energize these beliefs
and validate the images they birth. Critical to the
tenacity and flexibility of countersubversive interpretations are their articulate champions. Politicians, religious leaders, journalists, government
officials, and leading industrialists, along with
other role models, have cleared a path for ordinary
men and women. If the eccentrics among the conspiracy minded have received a disproportionate
share of attention, it is necessary to remember that
their mates inhabit all social, economic, and political groups.
Robert Alan Goldberg
References
Bailyn, Bernard. 1967. The Ideological Origins of
the American Revolution. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Beard, Charles. 1948. President Roosevelt and the
Coming of War, 1941: A Study in Appearances
and Realities. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.
Bernard, David. 1829. Light on Masonry. Utica, NY:
William Williams.
Boyer, Paul, and Stephen Nissenbaum. 1974. Salem
Possessed: The Social Origins of Witchcraft.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Camp, Gregory S. 1997. Selling Fear: Conspiracy
Theories and the End-Times Paranoia. Grand
Rapids, MI: Baker.
Cherry, Conrad. 1971. God’s New Israel: Religious
Interpretations of American Destiny. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Conspiracy Theories in America: A Historical Overview

Commager, Henry Steele, ed. 1958. Documents of
American History. New York: Appleton Century
Crofts.
Donnelly, Ignatius. [1890] 1960. Caesar’s Column: A
Story of the Twentieth Century. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Farrakhan, Louis. 1998. Final Call. May 26.
Gardell, Mattias. 1996. In the Name of Elijah
Muhammad: Louis Farrakhan and the Nation of
Islam. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Gienapp, William. 1987. The Origins of the
Republican Party, 1852–1856. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Goldberg, Robert Alan. 2001. Enemies Within: The
Culture of Conspiracy in Modern America. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Goodman, Paul. 1988. Toward a Christian Republic:
Anti-Masonry and the Great Transition in New
England, 1826–1836. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Gruber, Ira. 1969. “The American Revolution as a
Conspiracy: The British View.” William and Mary
Quarterly 26: 360–372.
Hofstadter, Richard, and Michael Wallace, eds.
1971. American Violence: A Documentary
History. New York: Vintage.
Horowitz, David A. 1997. Beyond Left and Right:
Insurgency and the Establishment. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.
Johnson, George. 1983. Architects of Fear:
Conspiracy Theories and Paranoia in American
Politics. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Kazin, Michael. 1995. The Populist Persuasion: An
American History. New York: Basic Books.
Knight, Peter. 2001. Conspiracy Culture: From the
Kennedy Assassination to The X-Files. London
and New York: Routledge.
Lee, Albert. 1980. Henry Ford and the Jews. New
York: Stein and Day.
Mather, Cotton. 1692. The Wonders of the Invisible
World. New York: Bell.

Morse, Samuel F. B. 1835. Foreign Conspiracy
against the Liberties of the United States. New
York: Leavitt, Lord.
Nye, Russel B. 1972. “The Slave Power Conspiracy:
1830–1860.” Pp. 78–86 in Conspiracy: The Fear
of Subversion in American History, ed. Richard
O. Curry and Thomas N. Brown. New York: Holt,
Rhinehart, and Winston.
Ostrander, Gilman M. 1957. The Prohibition
Movement in California, 1848–1933. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Palmer, A. Mitchell. 1920. “The Case against the
Reds.” Forum 63: 173–185.
Robertson, Pat. 1984. Answers to 200 of Life’s Most
Probing Questions. Nashville, TN: Thomas
Nelson.
Roosevelt, Theodore. 1917. The Foes of Our Own
Household. New York: George H. Doran
Company.
Stauffer, Vernon. 1918. New England and the
Bavarian Illuminati. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Stone, Oliver. 1992. JFK: The Book of the Film. New
York: Applause Books.
Toland, John. 1982. Infamy: Pearl Harbor and Its
Aftermath. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Warren, Earl. “Testimony.” 1942. U.S. House. Select
Committee Investigating National Defense
Migrations Hearings: Part 29. 77th Cong., 2nd
sess.
Welch, Robert H.W., Jr. 1966. “The Truth in Time.”
American Opinion 9: 1–27.
White, Alma. 1925. The Ku Klux Klan in Prophecy.
Zaraphath, NJ: Good Citizen.
———. 1928. Heroes of the Fiery Cross. Zaraphath,
NJ: Good Citizen.
Winthrop, John. 1998. “A Model of Christian
Charity.” In American View, ed. Robert
Goldberg, Eric Hinderaker, and Dean May.
Needham Heights, MA: Simon and Schuster.

13

Making Sense of
Conspiracy Theories
Defining the Terms “Conspiracy”
and “Conspiracy Theory”
At first sight it should be fairly easy to define the
terms “conspiracy” and “conspiracy theory.” A
straightforward definition of a conspiracy is when a
small group of powerful people combine together
in secret to plan and carry out an illegal or improper
action, particularly one that alters the course of
events. But the term is often used fairly loosely. We
might wonder, for example, whether the activities
of intelligence agencies involved in spying and carrying out covert missions count as conspiracies by
this definition. They are by their very nature plotted
in secret, and they are indeed intended to alter the
shape of history, but we might wonder if the everyday machinations of, say, CIA agents constitute a
conspiracy because they are merely doing their job.
Only in some cases is it immediately obvious that
their actions are illegal or improper, and hence a
conspiracy rather than merely being a covert operation. The problem with making illegality or impropriety part of the definition of a conspiracy is that it
depends who is defining what’s illegal or not. In the
realm of the law it is comparatively straightforward
to determine if something is a criminal conspiracy
(it is illegal, for example, to engage in the kind of
price-fixing that was uncovered in the fine-art auction industry in the 1990s, and hence it would be
valid to say that the auction houses engaged in a
conspiracy). But in the arena of history, there are no
hard-and-fast rules of what is permissible or not.
What to one person may look like a conspiracy to

alter the course of events, to others will seem
merely the regular dog-eat-dog spectacle of political maneuvering.
The second problem with the term “conspiracy”
is that it relies on a fairly strong notion of intention
(often referred to as a sense of “agency” in theoretical discussions). A conspiracy is only a conspiracy,
we might suppose, if the plotters fully intended to
carry out that particular action and were quite
aware of the consequences of it. So, for example,
we might wonder whether there is a deliberate
conspiracy by men to keep women in a subordinate
position. It’s undeniable that historically women
have found themselves thwarted in a variety of
social, legal, and political ways, and it’s also undeniable that at least some men have actively
approved of that situation, but the question
remains whether men’s vague and perhaps even
unspoken desire for supremacy is what has causally
resulted in the oppression of women. Does a conspiracy have to involve not just the desire and
intention to bring about a certain effect, but the
proven fact of a causal connection? In other words,
does a conspiracy always have to be conscious,
deliberate, and explicitly stated, or can it emerge
from the implicit, taken-for-granted assumptions
and patterns of thought that slowly accumulate
over time and that really do shape history? Most
commentators would still insist that if the term
“conspiracy” is to have any meaning at all, then it
must involve deliberate agency. But some theorists
have more recently begun to suggest that certain
15

Making Sense of Conspiracy Theories

states of affairs (for example, sexism and racism)
are not merely the result of chance but are the
perhaps unintended consequence of a series of
attitudes and ways of behaving that together
amount to something that may as well have been a
conspiracy. You don’t need to say it out loud for
there to be a conspiracy, this theory suggests.
This problem with defining the nature of agency
leads us to the even more tricky problem of coming
up with a working definition of a conspiracy theory.
At the most basic level, a conspiracy theory blames
the current, undesirable state of affairs on a concerted conspiracy by a secret group. It is in effect an
interpretation of history that claims that things aren’t
always what they seem, and that things haven’t just
tumbled out by coincidence in the normal, more-orless random fashion, but that they have only got like
this because someone with evil intentions planned it
this way. However, the label “conspiracy theory”
usually suggests that the interpretation offered is
wrong. In effect the phrase is often not a neutral
description of a form of historical analysis, as if it
were just another form of historical theory alongside, say, postcolonial theory or feminist theory.
Instead it usually carries an implicit accusation:
there are undoubtedly conspiracy facts (the suggestion is), but in this case your view is just a conspiracy
theory, a misleading speculation, and even woolyheaded thinking that verges on the mentally disturbed. Usually what lies behind the accusation is
either a specific criticism that in this particular case
the theory is wrong (for example, contrary to some
conspiracy theories, President Roosevelt did not
know in advance about the Japanese attacks on Pearl
Harbor), or that the view of history put forward by
conspiracy theories is always necessarily wrong (history in this view is not the result of a concerted plot
but, to cite two popular positions, the fairly random
and unpredictable interaction of countless individuals, or the predictable interplay of vast, impersonal
structural forces). Looked at the other way, a conspiracy theory that has been proven (for example,
that President Nixon and his aides plotted to disrupt
the course of justice in the Watergate case) is usually
called something else—investigative journalism, or
just well-researched historical analysis. Usually no
16

one claims to believe in a conspiracy theory as such.
The people accused of believing in conspiracy theories about the death of President Kennedy, for
example, are very insistent that they are assassination researchers and not conspiracy buffs. It’s only
other people who are conspiracy theorists, the argument goes.
Some historians have come up with more elaborate definitions of conspiracy theory in order to
make clear what is so distinctive about it. For example, Richard Hofstadter’s classic study (1964) of
what he termed the “paranoid style in American
politics” recognized that there have indeed been
actual conspiracies here or there in U.S. history, but
that a conspiracy theorist believes that there is “a
‘vast’ or ‘gigantic’ conspiracy as the motive force in
historical events” (Hofstadter, 29). According to this
kind of view, conspiracy theory is more than just the
odd speculation about clandestine causes; it is a way
of looking at the world and historical events that
sees conspiracies as the motor of history (in contrast
to other theorists who have argued that, say, economics or ideas are the real engines pushing forward the wheel of history). Other commentators
(e.g., Pipes, and Robins and Post) have recently
pushed Hofstadter’s definition even further, arguing
that we need to make a distinction between “petty
conspiracies,” which merely involve fears about
groups secretly scheming to gain local or small-scale
advantage, and “world conspiracy theories,” which
involve warnings about a political takeover by a
malign cabal with large-scale or even global aspirations to power. According to this theory, the reason
for making the distinction is that only world conspiracy theories are worth studying because they are
the kind that often lead to dangerous social and
political movements such as Nazism and Stalinism.
These attempts to define what counts as a conspiracy theory are useful in that they draw attention to an important aspect of the phenomenon,
particularly in some of its more prominent outbursts in U.S. history (anti-Catholicism in the nineteenth century, for example, took the form of warnings that the pope and his representatives were
scheming to bring about worldwide domination of
the Church in Rome). They also try to impose

Making Sense of Conspiracy Theories

some limits on the meaning of a term that is always
threatening to creep far beyond any agreed usage.
However, by limiting the definition in advance they
are in danger of leaving out some examples of conspiratorial thought that have a lot in common with
conspiracy theories. They also downplay what
seems to be one of the important functions of conspiracy theory today, namely questioning how much
we are in control of our own minds and our own
actions through the debate over exactly what is to
count as a conspiracy or not. (If a conspiracy theory
serves no other purpose, it is often the way that
nonprofessional historians try out ideas about the
nature of historical change. Trying to decide what
term to use to describe a state of affairs that looks
just as if there were a conspiracy is part of the function of a conspiracy theory today.) Finally, as helpful as these definitions are in making the loose
baggy monster of conspiracy theory more manageable, they also end up rigging the game so as to
favor a particular theoretical take on the nature of
the phenomenon.
There have certainly always been conspiracies of
one kind or another in U.S. history. And there has
undoubtedly always been some speculation about
the role of secret plotters in that history, even if
those speculations don’t quite amount to a conspiracy theory according to some of the more
restrictive definitions (or aren’t necessarily to be
condemned, as we shall see below). What is comparatively new, however, is the term “conspiracy
theory” itself. The phrase first entered the supplement to the Oxford English Dictionary in 1997,
which is an indication of how much a buzzword it
has become in recent decades. However, the entry
suggests that the first recorded usage of the phrase
was in an article in the American Historical Review
in 1909, although it did not become familiar in academic writing until the 1950s (with the work of
Karl Popper), and did not really become common
currency until the 1960s. The belated coining of
the phrase might be merely a case of historians
latching on to a handy short-hand expression for an
already well-known, coherent, and recurring phenomenon. It might, however, be the case that coming up with a label for the phenomenon actually

invents the phenomenon itself, in the sense that a
new conceptual category turns what otherwise
would have been a set of possibly quite diverse
ideas into a coherent style of thought.
What’s interesting about the phrase now is that
the people who are accused (or sometimes diagnosed) of being conspiracy theorists are often well
aware of the charge, and many an article on the
Internet about, say, the New World Order begins
with the disclaimer that “I know I’ll be accused of
being a conspiracy theorist, but . . .” The significance of this self-aware and often self-reflexive discussion of the very phrase used to describe the
phenomenon is that it is beginning to change
the nature of the phenomenon itself, especially in
the realm of popular culture. The 1997 Hollywood
blockbuster Conspiracy Theory (starring Mel Gibson and Julia Roberts) takes this self-consciousness
to an extreme: whereas in the past a film might
have merely had the name of a particular conspiracy as its title, in this case it bizarrely uses the
generic term as its title. One thing that makes the
historical study of conspiracy theories particularly
challenging, then, is that determining what constitutes the phenomenon has become part of the phenomenon itself.
The United States and Conspiracy
Theory: A Special Relationship?
The United States has long had a fascination with
conspiracies. As the entries and the primary source
extracts in this encyclopedia make clear, the imagination or the detection of secret plotting has been
a recurrent feature of U.S. history, albeit with more
prominent outbursts in some periods than others.
It’s often suggested (not least by commentators
outside the United States) that the nation has a
particular affinity to conspiratorial thought, that
conspiracy theory is a distinctively U.S. phenomenon. There are some good reasons to think that this
is the case. It’s arguable, for example, that a suspiciousness toward strangers and outsiders (or even
just the frightening “wilderness” itself) is a dominant feature of the early Puritan settlers. Some
critics have suggested that the Puritan habit of
mind that sought signs and symptoms of the work
17

Making Sense of Conspiracy Theories

of the Almighty in tiny, everyday clues was just a
short step away from a conspiratorial mentality that
tried to read every event for its hidden meaning. In
a similar vein, some historians have argued that the
nature of the American Revolution has “conditioned Americans to think of resistance to a dark
subversive force as the essential ingredient of their
national identity” (Davis, 23), a view that is apparent in the catalog of suspicions about the intentions
of the British government that are written into the
Declaration of Independence itself. It is even plausible to suggest that the fear of sinister enemies,
both real and imagined, both internal and external,
was one of the most important factors that helped
to shape the disparate British colonies into a united
state. Another possible reason for the seeming
close connection between America and conspiracy
theory is America’s foundational sense of its
unique, divinely ordained destiny, a sense of American exceptionalism that has helped to promote the
feeling that any deflection from that manifest destiny must be the result of a concerted plot (by
satanic forces in the early years, and by malign
political agents in later times). Another version of
this argument is that it is Americans’ traditional,
republican faith in openness and democracy that
has led them to be highly suspicious of any political
maneuverings that smack of secrecy, elitism, or
even of unnecessary involvement of intrusive federal government in the life of free individuals (see
Wills). It has even been suggested that lack of a
popular socialist tradition in the United States (in
comparison with Europe) means that Americans
are comparatively less likely to believe that history
operates through the impersonal interaction of
economic forces and social classes and more likely
to believe that history is the product of individual
agency, which is sometimes benign and transparent, and at others malign and covert. Finally, some
historians have put forward the idea that more
recently the United States has become the home of
conspiracy theories because so many high-level,
prominent conspiracies have been undertaken and
uncovered since the 1960s.
On the other hand, it is not difficult to see that
the United States does not have a monopoly on
18

conspiracy theories. Historians (e.g., Pipes, and
Robins and Post) have pointed out that although
U.S. politics might once have been dominated by
the conspiratorial scapegoating of minorities and
the alarmist imagination of invasive enemies (particularly in the nineteenth century), more recently
conspiracy theory in the United States has been
confined to inconsequential political sideshows or
even been transformed into a form of entertainment or titillation. We might disagree with the idea
that conspiracy theories have gone off the boil in
the United States (not least because they seem to
have become so publicly prominent), but it is certainly true that other countries have been and still
are dangerously attracted to a conspiratorial mindset. Stalinist Russia or the present-day Middle East,
for example, are both saturated with the rhetoric of
conspiracy and plot. Although there is a danger in
studying U.S. history in isolation because it tends
to fall too easily into the trap of U.S. exceptionalism, conspiracy theories have undoubtedly played a
vital role in U.S. history, and continue to occupy a
prominent place in everyday politics and popular
culture. But how exactly should we study them,
and what theoretical approaches have been
brought to bear on the phenomenon?
Refutations
Probably the most straightforward approach to conspiracy theory has been to catalog the error of its
ways instead of discussing it as a phenomenon or a
symptom. In a series of essays published in the
1940s and 1950s the philosopher Karl Popper
sought to refute conspiratorial interpretations of
society and history as conceptually misguided. He
defined the conspiracy theory of society as “the
view that whatever happens in society—including
things which as a rule people dislike, such as war,
unemployment, poverty, shortages—are the results
of direct design by some powerful individuals or
group” (Popper, 341). Popper went on to argue that
this view is necessarily false because it is inconceivable that such complex, global events are the result
of specific intentions of individuals. This dismissal
of conspiracy theory as a flawed understanding of
history is based on the revolution in social thought

Making Sense of Conspiracy Theories

that began in the nineteenth century with thinkers
such as Marx, Darwin, and Freud proposing (in
very different ways) that humans are not consciously in control of their own individual or collective destinies but are the subject of large, impersonal historical forces. These views are the mainstay
of what we now call the social sciences, and several
commentators (e.g., Wood) have suggested that
there is now no excuse for anyone to believe in a
“personalized” view of history anymore.
This argument is sometimes given a specific,
political twist (e.g., Albert). Although those on the
left of the political spectrum might be tempted to
believe in conspiracy theories (because they seem
to name and blame traditional left-wing enemies
such as corrupt government officials and corporate
insiders for the mess we’re in), they should steer
well clear of them. The reasoning is that the real
agents of history are not individuals (however powerful they may seem) but more abstract institutional structures that transcend any individual
intention: only by changing those structures of
power that condoned and perhaps even encouraged such activities (rather than merely removing
the guilty individuals who abused the system) can
there be any hope of social change. In this view, a
conspiracy theory that claims to have found the
real hidden causes of events (even if they are
proven true in some cases) will always in some
measure be mistaking or perhaps even mystifying
the real underlying causes of events that need to be
understood in terms of institutions rather than
individuals. Other commentators (e.g., Shermer),
however, have not taken up a specific political
stance, and have instead railed against the increasingly widespread belief in conspiracy theories as
evidence of the dumbing down of the United
States. These arguments often proceed from a
skeptical, debunking position, and point out the
inconsistencies and illogicalities in a variety of popular conspiracy theories.
Paranoid Style
If some writers have tried to show up the flaws in
conspiratorial thought, then others have sought to
explain its prevalence in U.S. history. Perhaps the

most popular and influential approach has been to
view the repeated imagination of conspiracies
everywhere as evidence of what the historian
Richard Hofstadter termed the “paranoid style in
American politics.” This approach explains the
presence of the rhetoric of conspiracy as a sign of
something akin to a collective paranoia at work. It
is not usually meant as a strict clinical diagnosis of
the conspiracy theorist as delusional, but instead
uses the psychological category of paranoia as a
way of identifying the social phenomenon and then
of explaining some of its features. This theory highlights features of conspiracy belief such as an ever
escalating suspiciousness; a sense of persecution;
the morbid projection onto the enemy of repressed
fantasies that the believer may hold; the apocalyptic fears that a whole way of life is under threat; and
the paradoxically comforting and grandiose sense
that although a seemingly marginal player on the
stage of history, you are in fact the center of attention—albeit as the object of a sinister plot against
the group you belong to. According to the proponents of this view, the paranoid style is a prominent
and recurring style in U.S. history, from the founding of the republic to the recurrence in the nineteenth century of conspiracy-minded scapegoating
and nativism (the belief that the United States
belongs to native-born white Anglo-Saxon Protestants, and any newcomers from outside that group
present a significant threat to the American way of
life). The “paranoid style” explanation is at first
sight an extremely compelling way to characterize
(and condemn) the tendency to believe in conspiracy theories, even if it doesn’t fully succeed in
explaining them because of the circularity of argument (for what is paranoia, if not a propensity to
believe in conspiracy theories?). It’s real contribution was in taking this style of thought seriously,
and trying to find evidence of it in a wide range of
U.S. culture.
This approach became popularized by historians
such as Hofstadter and Bernard Bailyn in the
1960s, and can be seen in retrospect as partly a
response to the excesses of the McCarthyite anticommunist witch-hunts of the 1950s. Although
highlighting the recurrence of the often small19

Making Sense of Conspiracy Theories

minded, racist, and hateful paranoid mentality in
U.S. history made for fairly depressing reading,
these historians took some comfort from the fact
that the repeated outbursts usually seemed to be
confined to those on the margins of political power.
Later theorists (e.g., Rogin) have challenged this
last shred of comfort, arguing that it is not those
excluded from the center of power who are paranoid but that the mainstream itself is deeply pathological in its repeated scapegoating of minorities
throughout U.S. history. This view in effect says
that the irrational fear of subversive enemies is not
an occasional disruption of U.S. history, but is the
default mode of that history.
In an important article written in 1982, the historian Gordon Wood put forward a more historically
limited challenge to the psychohistorical claims that
are at the heart of the “paranoid style” theory. He
took issue with the idea that vast numbers of Americans, and some of the nation’s most important political leaders, are in some measure mentally disturbed. In particular Wood pointed out that a belief
in history as the product of individual agency was
understandably very common in the eighteenth
century, and it was not illogical at the time to think
that any seeming disturbance in the natural course
of events was the result of a deliberate and secret
scheme. However, Wood goes on to argue that,
since the emergence of the social sciences in the
later nineteenth century (that itself was a response
to the vastly increased complexity of political and
economic events in a world slowly becoming globalized), a belief in conspiracy as the engine of history
has once again been a sign of poor thinking and perhaps even of the kind of social exclusion that borders on paranoia.
Moral Panics and Scapegoating
An alternative explanation starts from the observation that conspiracy theories in America are usually
told not by those on the margins of society but by
the (comparatively) powerful about those on the
margins. This view highlights those moments in
American history when already victimized minorities (such as Jewish and Asian immigrants) have
become the subject of conspiracy theories that pin
20

the blame on them for current social woes (such as
unemployment). This approach sees conspiracy
theory as part of the larger pattern of scapegoating,
and focuses usually on right-wing and other antisemitic and racist hate groups.
An important component of this theory is its suggestion that conspiracy theories about blameless
victims are often whipped up quite cynically as part
of a larger campaign of popular hatred. In this
respect the psychology of belief envisaged by this
theory is very different from that proposed by the
“paranoid style” school. In that model, the believers in conspiracy theory can’t help themselves and
are in a sense victims of a style of thought that
clouds their judgment, along the lines of succumbing to an epidemic mass hysteria. But the conspiracy-as-scapegoating theory suggests that believers—or at least the leaders of the groups that
promote such beliefs—are merely spreading
rumors without necessarily believing in them.
A further development of this theory puts forward the idea that sometimes people at the very
center of power might create (or perhaps just cynically promote) a popular outburst of demonology in
order to further their own political schemes. This
view is sometimes known as the elitist theory of
moral panics, because it suggests that the elite
deliberately fuel moral panics in order to legitimate
repressive measures that would otherwise be unacceptable. Like the scapegoating theory, this position
has the advantage of not relying on unprovable
assertions about the psychological makeup of those
inclined to believe in conspiracy theories, and at its
best it can offer compelling and historically nuanced
accounts of the vested political and economic interests that are really being served by the promotion of
conspiracy beliefs. For example, one interpretation
of the antisocialist “red scares” of 1919–1920 is that
they were not so much a spontaneous outburst of
popular paranoia about an imagined threat to U.S.
sovereignty as a convenient excuse that was seized
upon by the authorities to bring in antilabor legislation that would have otherwise been deemed too
repressive. However, with its emphasis on the ruthlessly efficient manipulation of mass belief, it leaves
no room for understanding why so many people

Making Sense of Conspiracy Theories

come to accept conspiracy theories (are they all
just dupes?), or what function those scaremongering stories might fulfill for the people who circulate
them. Finally, this position is usually associated
with left-leaning interpretations of history, but
recently right-wing commentators have adapted it
in their allegations that events such as the Oklahoma City bombing and even the attacks of September 11 were in fact carried out by agents of the
government in order to soften up the public into
accepting antiterrorist measures that these rightwing groups see as curbing individual liberty. As
this admittedly extreme example suggests, however, the elitist theory of moral panic contains
within it the seeds of a conspiratorial interpretation
of history—albeit far more plausible in some cases
than others.
The Function of Conspiracy Theories
The approaches outlined so far all start from the
assumption that conspiracy theories are false,
hence the need for an explanation of why so many
people should come to believe in such a distorted
view of the world. An alternative approach, however, brackets off the question of whether the particular conspiracy theories are true or false (a distinction that some commentators suggest is
becoming far harder to make), and instead investigates what function the conspiracy stories fulfill in
the lives of the people and the groups who circulate them. This interpretation is concerned less
with developing a theory about the underlying psychology of the “paranoid style” across time than
with trying to account for the emergence of a particular belief at a particular historical moment by
looking at its purpose rather than its meaning. In
this respect it has much in common with the elitist
theory of moral panics, but it differs in that it does
not see the believers in conspiracy theory as unwitting dupes but as active shapers of theories that
help them to make sense of a confusing world. It
tends in effect to be a fairly charitable reading of
popular beliefs. Where some critics would dismiss
conspiracy theories as a failure to understand the
complex processes of historical causation, this view
argues that conspiracy theory is a kind of pop soci-

ology, a way of making sense of structure and
agency in a time when official versions of events
and more academic forms of explanation fail to
capture the imagination of a disillusioned public.
Some practitioners of this cultural studies
approach tune in to what conspiracy believers actually say by closely reading their writings and even by
interviewing them. The aim is not so much to establish what the people consciously believe as to find
out why, at a symbolic level, these beliefs make
some kind of expressive sense at a particular historical moment. So, for example, in Bridget Brown’s
study of alien abduction narratives (many of which
have a conspiratorial twist involving government
collusion) she both reads the main texts in the genre
and interviews abductees. She draws attention, for
example, to the way that abduction narratives often
focus on fears about medical experimentation (particularly about sexual fertility), and locates these
seemingly bizarre stories within the complex history
of the increasing role of technology and unapproachable experts in medicine, and debates about
the politics of abortion and other reproduction
issues. Other examples (e.g., Knight, Spark) see the
resurgence of conspiracy theories about the socalled New World Order and even theories about
government collusion with aliens as a way of talking
(in a displaced and distorted form) about issues
such as globalization, and the loss of control of personal and national economic destiny. At bottom
these kinds of densely historical accounts read conspiracy theories as symptomatic of larger fears that
circulate through the culture at particular moments
of stress. They suggest that even if the stories turn
out to be not literally true then they still manage to
capture and express—in however bizarre a fashion—a view of the contemporary world that is not
without foundation. One effect of this approach is
that the range of examples of what counts as a conspiracy theory worthy of the name and worthy of
study has begun to expand. The “paranoid style”
method was geared toward studying political movements, but some of the more recent studies of conspiracy theory have been interested in everyday
popular beliefs that are not explicitly political, and
often are manifested in the realm of culture. Some
21

Making Sense of Conspiracy Theories

commentators (e.g., Pipes) have argued that, even if
in other countries conspiracy theory is still explicitly
political, in the United States it has become thankfully relegated to the cultural realm. In contrast, the
cultural studies approach claims that politics is now
often carried out in the cultural realm, and so phenomena like conspiracy theories are not merely a
sideshow but are part of the real action.
Although most of these cultural studies accounts
remain fairly neutral in political terms, some have
tried to assess whether conspiracy theories are
reactionary or progressive. The traditional view
(common to both the paranoid style and moral
panic theories) is that conspiracy theories are
nearly always bad news: if they’re not immediately
harmful in their promotion of scapegoating, then
they produce a mystified view of the world that
prevents people from focusing on what’s really
wrong with the world. However, with the emergence of a strand of conspiracy culture (since the
assassinations of the 1960s and the revelations
about the wrongdoings of the government in the
1970s) that seems at first sight to be politically progressive, some commentators have wondered
whether conspiracy theories might now in this limited way have become part of a wider populist challenge to the status quo and the “official version” of
events. For example, in her study of alien conspiracy theories the political scientist Jodi Dean argues
that the proliferation of unsettling, logic-defying
abduction narratives works to erode the boundary
between the rational and the irrational, and that
this blurring of distinctions feeds into the wider
populist challenge to what is sometimes known as
consensus reality. But other critics (e.g., Crews)
have taken issue with such claims, pointing out that
there is something disturbing about championing
such beliefs as politically useful when in most cases
they make the believers miserable. (Brown takes a
halfway position, suggesting that although alien abductees find some measure of self-empowerment
in telling their stories, at the same time those stories only serve to emphasize their lack of power in
the face of nameless conspiring forces.) In his
detailed and careful study of this new wave of conspiracy belief, Mark Fenster tackles head-on the
22

question of its political possibilities (and takes issue
with the work of John Fiske in particular). He
comes to the conclusion that as much as it might
seem to be progressive in the way that it gives a
voice to a populist resentment with the authorities
(and most of his book is concerned with exploring
this possibility), conspiracy theory at the end of the
day is putting forward a distorted view of historical
causation that ultimately leads people astray from
real political engagement.
What these cultural studies approaches have in
common is that they see conspiracy theories as
being in dialog with their historical context (rather
than just an occasional outburst of mass hysteria that
is liable to crop up at any time more or less without
reason). Coming from the slightly different perspective of anthropology, another related approach sees
conspiracy theories as a form of urban legend or
rumor. For example, the folklorist Patricia Turner
has conducted field work to establish what conspiracy stories circulate in African American neighborhoods and has then categorized her findings and
shown how they fit in with other fears and fantasies
about racial interaction that permeate through the
culture, and how they have long historical roots. In
sum, all of the approaches outlined in this section
aim to read conspiracy theories alongside (and in
challenge to) other popular ways of making sense of
the interconnectedness of the world and its events.
Conspiracy Theories since the 1960s
The first wave of theorizing about conspiracy theories emerged in the wake of the outburst of anticommunist hysteria, and in some ways the models
that were developed spoke to the need to make
sense of that immediate past. Since the mid-1990s
there has been a renewed interest (both by academics and journalists) in trying to explain conspiracy theories, and this can be seen as a result of the
sudden emergence of a seemingly new and pervasive conspiracy culture that has as its most prominent emblem the television show The X-Files, but
which in all likelihood dates back to the political
turmoil of the 1960s in general and the assassinations of John and Robert Kennedy and Martin
Luther King in particular. Quite a few of these

Making Sense of Conspiracy Theories

recent studies have speculated that there has been
some kind of shift in conspiracy theory since the
1960s or thereabouts.
One explanation for the increasing prominence of
conspiracy theories in the United States in the second half of the twentieth century is that there have
quite simply been more conspiracies, many of which
have been uncovered. For example, the political scientist Ray Pratt suggests that it is no surprise that
there are so many films about omnipresent surveillance and government corruption because there has
been so much irrefutable evidence that the authorities really are up to no good. This kind of approach
starts from the possibility that a fair measure of
recent paranoia is fully justified.
Other critics argue that representations of conspiracy and paranoia in film and novels are not so
much realist portrayals of what is really going on as
they are distorted and stylized responses to a world
that has become impossible to make sense of
through traditional means. The literary critic
Fredric Jameson has suggested that the conspiracy
narratives of Hollywood films and popular thrillers
are an expression of people’s inability to make sense
of how the world fits together in the age of globalization. He argues that people turn to these kinds of
stories because they seem to offer a simplified handle on what is really going on in a postmodern world
that, for many people, has disintegrated into incoherent and overwhelming fragmentation of media
images and cultural styles that seem to jumble up
past, present, and previously distinct cultures in one
big global supermarket. In effect, conspiracy narratives offer people a way of threading together into a
coherent and revelatory plot the endless flood of
soundbites; but, warns Jameson, although these
accounts may promise clarity, they only end up mystifying what’s going on and so make the attempt to
locate ourselves within it even harder.
A different way of looking at the nature of conspiracy theories in the age of postmodernity is
offered by the literary critic Timothy Melley. Finding in his reading of a range of postwar American
novels and works of social theory a recurrent sense
of panic at the imagined threat to individual agency
at the hands of conspiring forces, Melley draws two

conclusions. The first is that the obsession with protecting a sense of rugged selfhood (sometimes
known as possessive individualism) has been a longrunning theme in U.S. literature, philosophy, and
politics. The second is that this obsession has taken
on a new twist in recent times, as Americans have
found themselves (as Jameson points out) under
threat of disintegrating into incoherence amid all the
profusion of conflicting styles and codes that make
up our sense of individuality. People are paranoid,
the argument goes, about becoming schizophrenic.
A different approach (e.g., Knight, Massumi)
argues that there has been a shift in the nature and
function of conspiracy theories since the 1960s and
that it has intensified since the end of the cold war in
the early 1990s. Whereas conspiracy theories once
offered a paradoxically comforting sense of identity
(only by knowing who your enemy is can you really
know who you are, the theory goes), they now are
unable to clearly identify a specific enemy or manageable threat and so no longer serve to bolster
national or group coherence in the way they once
did. Secure paranoia has in effect given way to insecure paranoia, as the clear-cut them-and-us political
tensions of the cold war have given way to the more
confusing geopolitics of global terrorism and other
borderless threats such as pollution and disease that
promote a permanent environment of risk and
uncertainty. In the wake of September 11, it remains
to be seen whether we are entering a new phase in
the history of conspiracy theories in the United
States, or whether that traumatic event will be interpreted in very familiar ways.
Conclusion
As with other controversial social phenomena
(such as religious faith or belief in science), the battle lines amid competing explanations are often
deeply entrenched and politically motivated.
Accounts that emphasize the dangers of the paranoid style and lament the gullibility of conspiracy
theorists tend to (but do not always) emerge from
a conservative view of human nature and history,
whereas approaches that highlight the role that
conspiracy theory plays in giving voice to popular
grievances (however distorted) usually rely on a
23

Making Sense of Conspiracy Theories

more liberal understanding of society and culture.
Often each camp is talking about a different set of
examples, so that each theory makes sense only in
its own context. Since conspiracy theories have
taken on so many different guises in different historical periods, there is good reason to think that
there is no one-size-fits-all theory that can encompass and explain all the dizzying variety.
Conspiracy theory seems to be mutating all the
time, fulfilling diverse functions for different people at distinct historical moments, often in quite
unpredictable ways. For example, some commentators (e.g., Kelly) have pointed how recently there
seems to have been a convergence between, on the
one hand, a revived version of traditional rightwing conspiracy theories that talk about the shadowy influence of unelected globalist groups like the
Bilderbergers and the United Nations, and on the
other a more countercultural attack on the influence of undemocratic forms of national and international institutions such as the CIA and the World
Trade Organization. This kind of “fusion paranoia,”
where Right meets Left, demands a rethink of traditional accounts of everyday politics and popular
protest movements. Whichever interpretation you
follow, what is becoming increasingly clear is that
conspiracy theory can no longer be dismissed as a
trivial sideshow to real politics, but has become a
part of political and cultural life in the United
States that demands to be taken seriously.
Peter Knight
References
Albert, Michael, and Stephen R. Shalom. 2002.
“Conspiracies or Institutions: 9-11 and Beyond.”
http://thunderbay.indymedia.org/news/2002/06/
669.php
Bailyn, Bernard. 1967. The Ideological Origins of
the American Revolution. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Berlet, Chip. 1997. “Conspiracism.” http://www.
publiceye.org/
Brown, Bridget. 2002. “ ‘My Body Is Not My Own’:
Alien Abduction and the Struggle for SelfControl.” In Knight, ed.: 107–132.
Camp, Gregory S. 1997. Selling Fear: Conspiracy
Theories and End-Times Paranoia. Grand Rapids:
Baker.

24

Crews, Frederick. 1998. “The Mindsnatchers.” New
York Review of Books 45 (25 June 1998): 14–19.
Curry, Richard O., and Thomas M. Brown, eds.
1972. Conspiracy: The Fear of Subversion in
American History. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
Davis, David Brion, ed. 1971. The Fear of
Conspiracy: Images of Un-American Subversion
from the Revolution to the Present. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.
Dean, Jodi. 1998. Aliens in America: Conspiracy
Cultures from Outerspace to Cyberspace. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.
Fenster, Mark. 1999. Conspiracy Theories: Secrecy
and Power in American Culture. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Fiske, John. 1994. “Blackstream Knowledge:
Genocide.” In Media Matters: Everyday Culture
and Political Change. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press. Pp. 191–216.
Goldberg, Robert. 2001. Enemies Within: The
Culture of Conspiracy in Modern America. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Graumann, Carl F., and Serge Moscovici, eds. 1987.
Changing Conceptions of Conspiracy. New York:
Springer.
Hofstadter, Richard. 1967. The Paranoid Style of
American Politics and Other Essays. New York:
Vintage.
Jameson, Fredric. 1991. Postmodernism, or, The
Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. London:
Verso.
Johnson, George. 1983. Architects of Fear:
Conspiracy Theories and Paranoia in American
Politics. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Kelly, Michael. 1995. “The Road to Paranoia.” New
Yorker 71 (19 June 1995): 60–64, 66–70, 72–75.
Knight, Peter. 2000. Conspiracy Culture: From the
Kennedy Assassination to “The X-Files.” London:
Routledge.
———, ed. 2002. Conspiracy Nation: The Politics of
Paranoia in Postwar America. New York: New
York University Press.
Levine, Robert S. 1989. Conspiracy and Romance:
Studies in Broackden Brown, Cooper, Hawthorne,
and Melville. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Lipset, Seymour Martin, and Earl Raab. 1970. The
Politics of Unreason: Right-Wing Extremism in
America, 1790–1970. New York: Harper and Row.
Marcus, George E., ed. 1998. Paranoia within
Reason: A Casebook on Conspiracy as
Explanation. Chicago: Chicago University Press.

Making Sense of Conspiracy Theories

Massumi, Brian. 1993. “Everywhere You Want to
Be: Introduction to Fear.” In The Politics of
Everyday Fear, ed. Massumi. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Melley, Timothy. 2000. Empire of Conspiracy: The
Culture of Paranoia in Postwar America. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.
Mottram, Eric. 1989. “Out of Sight but Never Out
of Mind: Fears of Invasion in American Culture.”
In Blood on the Nash Ambassador: Investigations
in American Culture. London: Hutchinson
Radius. Pp. 138–180.
O’Donnell, Patrick. 2000. Latent Destinies: Cultural
Paranoia and Contemporary U.S. Narrative.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Parish, Jane, and Martin Parker, eds. 2001. The Age
of Anxiety: Conspiracy Theory and the Human
Sciences. Oxford: Blackwell.
Pasley, Jeff L. 2000. “Conspiracy Theory and
American Exceptionalism from the Revolution to
Roswell.” http://conspiracy.pasleybrothers.com/
CT_and%20American_Exceptionalism_web_
version_Main.htm
Pipes, Daniel. 1997. Conspiracy: How the Paranoid
Style Flourishes and Where It Comes From. New
York: Free Press.
Popper, Karl. 1963. Conjectures and Refutations.
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Pratt, Ray. 2001. Projecting Paranoia: Conspiratorial
Visions in American Film. Lawrence: University
Press of Kansas.

Robins, Robert S., and Jerold M. Post. 1997.
Political Paranoia: The Psychopolitics of Hatred.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Rogin, Michael. 1987. Ronald Reagan, The Movie.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Ronson, Jon. 2001. Them: Adventures with
Extremists. London: Picador.
Schultz, Nancy Lusignan, ed. 1999. Fear Itself:
Enemies Real and Imagined in American Culture.
West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press.
Shermer, Michael. 1997. Why People Believe Weird
Things. New York: Freeman.
Showalter, Elaine. 1997. Hystories: Hysterical
Epidemics and Modern Culture. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Spark, Alasdair. 2001. “Conjuring Order.” In Parish
and Parker.
Turner, Patricia. 1993. I Heard It through the
Grapevine: Rumor in African-American
Experience. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Vankin, Jonathan. 1991. Conspiracies, Cover-ups,
and Crimes: Political Manipulation and Mind
Control in America. New York: Paragon House.
Wood, Gordon S. 1982. “Conspiracy and the
Paranoid Style: Causality and Deceit in the
Eighteenth Century.” William and Mary
Quarterly 39: 401–441.

25

A
Abolitionism
Overview
Although great believers in the Slave Power Conspiracy and often party to anti-Catholic and other
evangelically oriented conspiracy theories themselves, American abolitionists were also frequently
accused of conspiracy, especially in the South but
also in the North. Improbable as it may seem from
a modern vantage point, the heroic opponents of
slavery were commonly depicted in the terms
reserved for conspiracy theory’s most despicable
villains, e.g., witches, Illuminati, and Communists.
South Carolina’s William Henry Drayton pictured
“these conspirators . . . at their midnight meetings,
where the bubbling cauldron of abolition was filled
with its pestilential materials” (Davis, 35). An 1852
writer in DeBow’s Review of New Orleans actually
compared abolitionism with communism (then
newly invented), seeing them both as part of a blasphemous, hypocritical foreign campaign to overturn a social order ordained by “the thought of
God” Himself: “What means this darkly-shadowed
caricature of good—this horrible disfigurement of
Christian charity—which, but that it stalks in terrible reality before us, would seem like the mockery
of some fearful dream?” (L.S.M., 509).
From the Haitian Revolution on, slave rebellions
real and imagined had been widely blamed on abolitionists, sometimes for just inspiring slaves from afar
but increasingly, over time, for direct “intermed-

dling” with them. Some southerners even charged
abolitionists with their slaves’ day-to-day insubordination, as well as the harsh discipline allegedly necessary to suppress this insubordination. Indeed,
proslavery publicist Edmund Ruffin argued in 1857
that only “abolition action” prevented slaves from
being “the most comfortable, contented, and happy
laboring class in the world” (Ruffin, 549). Ruffin and
other white southerners envisioned the abolitionists
as a vast network of open agitators and allied secret
agents who had fanned out across the South, undercover as salesman, ministers, and teachers, and
coaxed slaves to escape or, better yet, slaughter their
masters. “There is no neighborhood in the Southern
States into which Yankees have not penetrated,”
claimed Ruffin, “and could freely operate as abolition agents” (Ruffin, 546). This was a ridiculously
inaccurate statement, of course, since by the time
this passage was written it had long since become
illegal as well as unsafe in most of the South to
oppose slavery or even unenthusiastically support it.
Abolitionists in the North spoke and wrote in
public forums, but were always suspected of secret
designs and hidden agendas. Funding and organizing the subversion of slavery in the South was one
accusation. Others included complicity in a British
plot to break up the Union and/or a secret neofederalist stratagem to destroy the Democratic Party.
Not surprisingly, these antiabolitionist theories
often came from the ranks of northern Democrats
eager to retain the favor of their southern wing.

27

Abolitionism

Before detailing some of the more specific
beliefs about the abolitionists, it is vital to put them
in more realistic perspective than antiabolitionists
usually provided. The idea of abolitionist involvement in engineering servile rebellion was mostly a
fantasy, even in the case of the one abolitionist, John
Brown, who actually tried it. Radical abolitionists
were commonly sincere religious pacifists. Before
Brown’s activities in the 1850s, almost no hard evidence exists of plots or nondefensive violence instigated by northern abolition activists. Abolitionists
certainly protected fugitive slaves when they could,
and aided some escapes in border regions and port
cities, but they posed no physical and little economic threat to slaveholders, whose human and real
property was worth more on the eve of the Civil
War than it ever had been before. Moreover, radical abolitionists never enjoyed widespread political
influence, and the charge that they dominated
Abraham Lincoln’s Republican Party (the so-called
“Black Republicans”) was both a partisan slur and
an important part of the southern conspiracy theory
about the northern antislavery sentiment.
The term “Black Republicans” also contained
another connotation. It was the habit of all slavery’s
defenders (and their political allies) to conflate any
degree of opposition to slavery with the most radical forms of abolitionism and egalitarianism they
could imagine. So politicians and writers taking the
much more widespread “free soil” position, opposing only slavery’s further expansion, were treated as
outright abolitionists, and those who showed any
degree of concern for black rights were likely to be
denounced as advocates of full social equality with
blacks and “amalgamation” of the races.
It should be noted that the situation as described
above took several decades of U.S. history to fully
develop. Negative attitudes and outlandish beliefs
about abolitionists had long circulated in areas like
the lower South and the Caribbean, where the
extremely large slave populations left whites feeling
nervous and outnumbered. These conspiracy theories became far more widespread with the radicalization of antislavery that took place in the 1820s and
1830s.

28

From Moderation to Radicalism in the
American Abolition Movement
Before the late 1820s, American abolitionism was
almost painfully polite, tentative, and moderate.
During the American Revolution, it came to be
generally agreed outside the lower South that slavery was inconsistent with the egalitarians ideals of
the Declaration of Independence and other revolutionary mission statements. The northern states
abolished slavery in the years after the Revolution,
though often by means of gradual emancipation
laws that only freed the adult children of current
slaves.
Quakers opposed slavery as a matter of conscience and lobbied for abolition during the First
Congress, but without results. The bulk of antislavery activity in the early Republic was more Jeffersonian in approach, looking to end the international slave trade (which occurred in 1808) and
find some means of phasing southern slavery out
while minimizing economic and social disruptions.
Slaveholders were to be compensated for their
losses to abolition, and the creation of a large free
black population would be avoided by sending former slaves to colonies in Africa or some other faraway place. This was the formula promoted by the
early Republic’s most prominent antislavery organization, the American Colonization Society, which
counted James Madison, Henry Clay, Andrew
Jackson, and Francis Scott Key among its members
and enjoyed the official aid of the U.S. government
and navy.
Despite the moderation of these early efforts, the
slaveholding politicians of the lower South reacted
harshly to the idea of even discussing limitations on
slavery. The Carolinas and Georgia forced special
protections and extra representation for slavery to
be built into the federal constitution. The Quakers
petitioning the First Congress were accused by
South Carolina’s Aedanus Burke of being British
spies who were “for bringing this country under a
foreign yoke.” During the same debate, southern
congressmen made veiled threats to leave the newborn Union if such discussions continued, arguing
that “every principle of policy and concern for . . .

Abolitionism

Ladies’ Department from “The Liberator,” published by
William Lloyd Garrison, 1849. (Bettmann/Corbis)

the peace and tranquility of the United States, concur to show the propriety of dropping the subject
[of slavery], and letting it sleep where it is” (Debates
and Proceedings in Congress).
When northern congressmen voted to exclude
slavery from the new state of Missouri in 1820,
much less than what the Quakers had asked, the
uproar was far worse. Thomas Jefferson declared it
“the knell of the Union” (Jefferson, 1434) and the
Virginia capital was “agitated as if affected by all
the Volcanic eruptions of Vesuvius” (Brown, 438).

Extremism in the defense of slavery was no vice,
and moderation in the pursuit of abolition was
increasingly not accepted as a virtue.
Under these circumstances, it is not surprising
that black and many white abolitionists grew impatient with the moderate approach. Hence their rhetoric and tactics became much more radical beginning in the late 1820s. The new approach asked, in
far less apologetic tones, for immediate, uncompensated abolition, without colonization, as a matter of
moral right. Public notice of the shift in abolitionist
thought was given by the appearance of three new
abolitionist publications between 1827 and 1830:
Freedom’s Journal, the first African American newspaper; white abolitionist printer William Lloyd Garrison’s newspaper The Liberator; and, especially, the
1829 pamphlet An Appeal to the Colored Citizens of
the World, by black used-clothing dealer David
Walker. Walker and Garrison almost immediately
became two of the most hated (and feared) men in
all the South. Although the pamphlet itself was considerably less ferocious than its reputation, Walker’s
Appeal became notorious for its defense (as a last
resort) of violent resistance to slavery, and for its
then-unusually apocalyptic warnings about consequences of continued oppression of the black population: “I tell you Americans! that unless you speedily alter your course, you and your Country are
gone! ! ! ! !” (Walker, 1829).
What frightened southerners even more was the
fact that Walker, who came from the South but
lived in Boston, actually managed to distribute
some of his pamphlets in the South. A parcel of
sixty copies arrived in Savannah, Georgia, in
December 1829, just after the pamphlet was published, and more were soon found in the Carolinas,
Virginia, and Louisiana. One of the antebellum
South’s frequent slave conspiracy panics quickly
ensued. Numerous southern jurisdictions passed
new laws against slave education and seditious or
“incendiary” literature, of which North Carolina’s
was one of the harshest. Writing, publishing, or circulating any publication tending to “to excite insurrection, conspiracy, or resistance in the slaves or
free Negroes” was made a crime punishable by a

29

Abolitionism

year in prison and whipping for the first offense,
and death for the second offense (Eaton, 124).
Abolitionist activity actually became a capital crime
in much of the South, and this was only the beginning of a decades-long campaign to purge ideological nonconformity from the region, at least as it
pertained to slavery. Georgia newspaper editor Elijah Burritt had to flee for his life when it was discovered that he had received twenty copies of the
Appeal at the post office.
Many southerners at the time, along with some
historians, have suspected some connection between’s Walker’s pamphlet and the 1831 Nat Turner
slave rebellion in Virginia, in which fifty-five whites
were killed. (Similar Walker links have been seen to
a Christmas 1830 slave rebellion outside New Bern,
North Carolina, but that outbreak was quickly and
brutally suppressed before any whites came to
harm.) Virginia governor John Floyd received a likely
fraudulent letter from one “Nero” claiming that
Turner’s raid was only the beginning. “Many a white
agent” like Burritt was already in place, Nero
claimed, and the slaves were also enlisting the aid of
the removal-threatened Indians in Georgia (Hinks,
132). The most concrete link between Walker’s
Appeal and Nat Turner was probably their common
roots in the spiritual and political ferment that was
roiling through American black communities around
that time—there were serious slave uprisings in
Jamaica and other Caribbean colonies during 1830
and 1831. Rumors of imminent abolition may have
played a role in the unrest, but rumors hardly
required a network of agents to spread.
David Walker died in 1830, but his legacy as
chief bugbear of southern slaveholders was amply
carried on by the rise of William Lloyd Garrison
and other aggressive immediatists during the
1830s. Garrison’s Liberator was read mostly by a
small audience of free blacks, but its most provocative passages seem to have been broadcast widely.
Garrison argued in vitriolic terms not only for abolition, but also racial equality and the enfranchisement of blacks, stands that made him, in the minds
of many suspicious southerners, a sort of evil poster
boy for the whole antislavery cause and possibly for
all of northern culture.
30

Garrison promised he would be “as harsh as
truth, and as uncompromising as justice” in his
campaign against slavery: “On this subject, I do not
wish to think, or speak, or write, with moderation.
No! no! Tell a man whose house is on fire, to give a
moderate alarm; tell him to moderately rescue his
wife from the hand of the ravisher; tell the mother
to gradually extricate her babe from the fire into
which it has fallen” (Cain, 72). Later Garrison became even more infamous for denouncing the Constitution as “a covenant with death, an agreement
with hell” because of its special favors for slavery.
On at least one occasion Garrison publicly burned a
copy of the document, endearing him to few northerners but burnishing his demonic credentials
down south.
The Conspiracy Is in the Mail: The Furor
over the Abolitionist Media Campaign
The new radical abolitionists were by and large
products of the Protestant religious revival known
as the Second Great Awakening. Following the
example of the evangelists who had spread the
Awakening, abolitionists developed an aggressive,
media-savvy campaign of “moral suasion” aimed at
converting white Americans to their cause. The
American Anti-Slavery Society was founded for this
purpose in 1833, and well funded by wealthy businessmen such as the Tappan brothers of New York.
The new abolitionists sent hundreds of petitions to
Congress asking for the abolition of slavery in
Washington, D.C., where there was no constitutional question of states rights to get in the way. At
the same time, beginning in the mid-1830s, they
unleashed a multimedia assault on American public
opinion the likes of which no one had ever seen
before. Antislavery newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, slave narratives, touring speakers, musicians,
songs, plays, and novels were all thrown into mix. In
the process, the abolitionists became probably the
first political group of any kind to send what we now
call direct mail solicitations, or junk mail, literature
sent directly to citizens that the citizen did not
request. Most controversially, the abolitionists sent
their literature into the South, usually in defiance of
local laws passed a few years earlier.

Abolitionism

The southern reaction to this campaign showed
the depth of slaveholders’ fears about slavery. Even
though slaves were 90–95 percent illiterate and
alleged to be deeply loyal to their masters, southern
leaders seemed to entertain the possibility that a
few words on paper might bring down their whole
house of cards. They became much more aggressive
about taking the position that any discussion of slavery in any context was incredibly dangerous, a form
of attempted murder against all southern whites.
Abolitionist mailings were regarded in the same
light that later generations would see letter bombs
or pornographic “spam” e-mail. Northern capitalists
were bankrolling the transmission of disruptive,
alien values into decent American communities.
Tennessee slaveholder and president Andrew Jackson thought that the abolitionists ought to “atone
for this wicked attempt with their lives.” Southern
postmasters refused to even handle the stuff, and
matters were soon arranged politically so that they
would not have to make the choice to violate their
oaths of office.
In July 1835, the Charleston, South Carolina,
postmaster put the abolitionist mailings in a separate bag, and that night a mob of so-called “Lynch
Men,” led by former governor John Lyde Wilson,
broke in and stole it. They then proceeded to make
that “incendiary” literature live up to the term,
making a bonfire with it that was cheered by some
2,000 spectators. Allegedly to protect the other less
inflammatory mail, the Charleston postmaster
asked that the postal service not accept further
abolitionist mailings for the South into the system,
and the postmaster in New York City, where the
American Antislavery Society was based, agreed.
Postmaster General and Democratic political
strategist Amos Kendall endorsed this decision and
made it official policy. It was a federal crime to
interfere with or refuse to deliver the mail, but
Kendall argued that while federal officials had an
obligation to execute the laws, they had a higher
obligation to the communities in which they lived.
If federal laws were “perverted” to destroy local
communities, as the abolitionists allegedly had
done, “it was patriotism to disregard” the laws
(John, 271).

Southerners also began to insist that the North
impose southern-style restrictions on abolitionist
free speech. Between 1834 and 1837, the free states
endured an intense wave of antiabolitionist rioting,
much of it not spontaneous but orchestrated by
Democratic politicians. Georgia Democrat John
Forsyth wrote to New York presidential hopeful
Martin Van Buren suggesting that “a little more
mob discipline of the white incendiaries would be
wholesome . . . A portion of the magician’s skill is
required in this matter . . . and the sooner you set
the imps to work the better” (Cole, 226).
Van Buren’s imps got to work. Beginning in
1834, they organized public meetings against abolitionism all over the North, and also orchestrated
hundreds of riots and other acts of violence aimed
at stopping the abolitionist media campaign, with
abolitionist lecturers, meetings, and newspapers the
primary targets. Not all of these attacks needed to
be arranged, but it was frequently noted that many
of the mobs consisted of not street thugs but pillars
of the community, “gentlemen of property and
standing” (Richards). The tragic culmination of this
anticonspiracy conspiracy was the 1837 riot that
killed one especially persistent abolitionist editor,
Presbyterian minister Elijah P. Lovejoy, who was
shot defending a new printing press—earlier mobs
had destroyed three others—in Alton, Illinois.
The controversy only died down once abolitionism was once again forced partly back into the
political closet. This was one goal of the mail ban,
and the main objective of the so-called “gag rule”
that Congress imposed from 1837 to 1844, automatically tabling all petitions about slavery and
thus preventing their official consideration.
Toward the Civil War
Though Congress was able to avoid the slavery
issue until the Wilmot Proviso reopened it in 1846,
neither the issue nor the abolitionists nor fear of
the abolitionists went away until after the Civil
War. During the late 1830s and 1840s, some antislavery activists became disenchanted with “moral
suasion” and split with the Garrisonians, turning to
the strategy of creating an antislavery political
party. The political abolitionists also had difficulties
31

Abolitionism

with the increasingly prominent role of nontraditional political actors—blacks and women—in the
movement.
At the same time, southern fears of antislavery
conspirators and southern intolerance of dissent
grew worse by the year. No proselytizing was
required to get in serious trouble with the proslavery thought vigilantes. In 1856, respected University of North Carolina professor Benjamin Sherwood Hedrick, and a colleague who defended him,
were forced out of their jobs. Hedrick had admitted, in response to a question, that he might have
voted for Republican candidate John C. Frémont,
if Frémont had even been on the ballot.
As southern intransigence deepened and the
Slave Power seemed to grow stronger, abolitionists
became more attracted to the direct action strategies of which southerners had long suspected
them. Yet while rescuing fugitive slaves or moving
west to keep Kansas free became popular missions
for some, the idea that “vile emissaries of abolition,
working like the moles under the ground” (Eaton,
100), were out engineering rebellions and “stealing” large numbers of slaves remained chiefly a
southern conspiracy theory.
The famed Underground Railroad, for instance,
was promoted almost as heavily by proslavery editors and politicians as it was by the abolitionists.
There really was a network of people in the North,
especially in Ohio and other states near slave territory, who helped escaped slaves make their way
north, but it was never as large, well organized, or
elaborate as the term “Underground Railroad” suggests. The modern practice of designating historic
homes of abolitionist sympathizers as “stations”
along established “lines” exaggerates the historical
reality. Abolitionists often used the new metaphor
of a railroad to describe the coming of freedom as
a train that was moving forward and could not be
stopped—“Get Off the Track!” was a popular abolitionist song, especially as performed by the antislavery singing stars, the Hutchinson Family
Singers. Abolitionist publications liked to tweak
southern fears by running joke advertisements for
fictitious railroads like the “Liberty Line,” with
many veiled references to the aid that escaped
32

slaves would be given and a satirical drawing of
blacks and whites riding in a literal train.
Once John Brown supplanted William Lloyd
Garrison as chief abolitionist archetype in southern
conspiracy theories after the 1859 raid on Harper’s
Ferry, secession and civil war came to seem
absolutely imperative to many southerners. Here
was just what they always knew the abolitionists
wanted. Brown’s plan for his “Provisional Army of
the North” called for an armed assault on slavery in
which a few northern whites and free blacks would
set off a bloody race war. The plan failed dismally of
course, but it had the backing of wealthy, important
men back in New England. Moreover, Brown’s dignified behavior and passionate speeches against
slavery at the trial and in newspaper interviews
made him a hero in the North, confirming all southern fears about what little regard their countrymen
had for their safety. Southerners had been chilled
by some of the implements that Brown had with
him when captured, such as hundreds of custom
cast-iron pikes to be handed out to freed slaves, and
a map full of mysterious marks at locations all over
the South. Down South, these marks were widely
interpreted as locations where Brown had slave
allies or white agents planted and ready to strike.
The Harper’s Ferry raid and the North’s reaction
to it set off a “crisis of fear” in many parts of the
South that continued right through the beginning
of the war. Vigilance committees in many localities
launched a wave of further terror and repression
against suspected abolitionists. Even talking to
blacks, or looking like an abolitionist, became dangerous. A free black barber in Knoxville, Tennessee,
was mistaken for Frederick Douglass and chased
through the streets. A stonecutter working on the
new South Carolina state capitol was whipped,
tarred, feathered, and deported for a stray remark.
This was the mood of South Carolina when Abraham Lincoln was elected president in 1860, in a
four-way race that allowed to him to win even
though he received no southern votes at all. With a
Black Republican in the White House, paranoid
South Carolinians saw no choice but to do what
they had been threatening to do for years, secede
from the Union. Only by separating from the Amer-

Abortion

ican Republic could they be safe from the hordes of
John Browns and pike-wielding blacks that Lincoln
would surely send.
Jeffrey L. Pasley
See also: African Americans; Brown, John; Fugitive
Slave Act; Slave Power; Slave Revolts; Turner, Nat.
References
Brown, Richard H. 1966. “The Missouri Crisis,
Slavery, and the Politics of Jacksonianism.” South
Atlantic Quarterly 65: 55–72.
Cain, William E., ed. 1995. William Lloyd Garrison
and the Fight against Slavery: Selections from
“The Liberator.” Boston, MA: Bedford Books of
St. Martin’s Press.
Channing, Steven A. 1974. Crisis of Fear: Secession
in South Carolina. New York: Norton.
Cole, Donald B. 1993. The Presidency of Andrew
Jackson. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
Davis, David Brion. 1969. The Slave Power
Conspiracy and the Paranoid Style. Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press.
DiGiacomantonio, William C. 1995. “‘For the
Gratification of a Volunteering Society’:
Antislavery and Pressure Group Politics in the
First Federal Congress.” Journal of the Early
Republic 15: 169–197.
Eaton, Clement. 1964. The Freedom-of-Thought
Struggle in the Old South. New York: Harper and
Row.
Finkelman, Paul. 1996. Slavery and the Founders:
Race and Liberty in the Age of Jefferson. Armonk,
NY: M. E. Sharpe.
Franklin, John Hope. 1956. The Militant South,
1800–1861. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press.
Gara, Larry. 1996. The Liberty Line: The Legend of
the Underground Railroad. Lexington: University
Press of Kentucky.
Hinks, Peter P. 1997. To Awaken My Afflicted
Brethren: David Walker and the Problem of
Antebellum Slave Resistance. University Park:
Pennsylvania State University Press.
Holt, Michael F. 1983. The Political Crisis of the
1850s. New York: Norton.
Jefferson, Thomas. 1984. Writings. Edited by
Merrill D. Peterson. New York: Library of
America.
John, Richard R. 1995. Spreading the News: The
American Postal System from Franklin to Morse.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

“L.S.M.” 1852. “Negro-Mania.” DeBow’s Review 12:
507–524.
Nord, David Paul. 1984. “The Evangelical Origins of
Mass Media in America, 1815–1835.” Journalism
Monographs (1984): 1–30.
Richards, Leonard L. 1970. “Gentlemen of Property
and Standing”: Anti-Abolition Mobs in Jacksonian
America. New York: Oxford University Press.
Ruffin, Edmund. 1857. “Consequences of Abolition
Agitation, No. IV: What Effect Disunion Would
Have upon Southern Slave Property in Peace or
in War.” DeBow’s Review 23: 546–552.
Stewart, James Brewer. 1976. Holy Warriors: The
Abolitionists and American Slavery. New York:
Hill and Wang.
United States. Congress. 1834–56. The Debates and
Proceedings in The Congress of the United States.
Washington, DC: Gales and Seaton. http://
memory.loc.gov/ammem/amlaw/lwac.html.
Walker, David. 1829. Appeal to the Colored Citizens
of the World. Boston, MA. Excerpts at http://
www.pbs.org/wgbh/aia/part4/4h2931t.html.

Abortion
Beginning with the prolonged campaign to outlaw
abortion led by members of the American Medical
Association in the 1860s and 1870s, antiabortion
advocates in the United States have frequently used
the rhetoric of conspiracy when talking about the
practice. The language of conspiracy was used to
describe not only the networks set up to provide
abortions but also the ways that those who provided
abortions allegedly conspired to conceal the “truth”
about the practice and its supposed risks from pregnant women and from the general public.
After the 1973 Supreme Court rulings in Roe v.
Wade and Doe v. Bolton struck down state laws
criminalizing abortion, antiabortion activists
endorsed a number of political strategies, some of
which have been called conspiratorial by feminists
and others who advocate abortion rights. Beginning in the 1980s, antiabortion leaders such as
Randall Terry of Operation Rescue and Joseph
Scheidler of the Pro-Life-Action Network recommended “direct action” campaigns targeting abortion providers. Demonstrations at facilities providing abortion became commonplace, as antiabortion
advocates sought to dissuade women from seeking
33

Abortion

Antiabortion protesters gather in front of the Supreme Court in Washington, D.C., on the sixteenth anniversary of the
decision to legalize abortion, January 23, 1989. (Bettmann/Corbis)

abortions, using means ranging from silent vigils to
physically preventing access to the clinic buildings.
Since the leaders of these campaigns openly
acknowledged that their goal was to drive abortion
providers out of business, feminist organizations
argued that they were committing criminal conspiracy against those providers.
In 1986, several women’s health organizations
filed suit in federal district court, using antitrust
laws to charge members of antiabortion organizations with criminal conspiracy. In 1989, the feminist organizations added violations of the federal
Racketeer-Influenced and Corrupt Organizations
(RICO) laws to their charges against the antiabortion organizations. In 1998, a civil jury found the
defendants in NOW v. Scheidler guilty of violating
RICO laws. The defendants appealed the decision,
and in 2003, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that
34

the antiracketeering laws had been improperly
used, nullifying the 1998 decision.
Abortion rights advocates also charge that the
increase in acts of direct violence against abortion
facilities after 1973 points to conspiratorial action
by antiabortion activists. These acts of violence
include hundreds of incidents of vandalism, arson
and firebombing, the 1982 kidnapping of an abortion doctor and his wife, and a series of shootings at
abortion clinics in the 1990s that resulted in seven
deaths and a number of injuries. Additionally,
between 1998 and 2001 hundreds of letters claiming to contain anthrax were mailed to abortion clinics around the United States, though they were
found to be hoaxes. A number of these actions, including the 1982 kidnapping, a 1993 shooting, and
the 1997 bombing of an abortion clinic and a gay
bar, have been linked to an organization calling

African Americans

itself the Army of God, which has published a manual outlining methods of vandalizing and bombing
abortion facilities and taking credit for several fatal
shootings of abortion providers. This manual, along
with the alleged circulation on the Internet of a “hit
list” of abortion providers, caused many to believe
that the increase in violence against abortion
providers in the 1990s was linked to a nationwide
conspiracy of antiabortion extremists. A grand jury
investigation conducted by the U.S. Department of
Justice from 1994 to 1996, however, found no definitive evidence of a national conspiracy.
Dana Luciano
See also: RICO.
References
Anonymous. The Army of God Manual.
http://www.armyofgod.com/AOGhistory.html.
Blanchard, Dallas A. 1994. The Anti-abortion
Movement and the Rise of the Religious Right:
From Polite to Fiery Protest. New York: Maxwell
Macmillan International.
Blanchard, Dallas A., and Terry J. Prewitt. 1993.
Religious Violence and Abortion: The Gideon
Project. Gainesville: University Press of Florida.
Diamond, Sara. 1998. “As If It Were Murder.” Pp.
131–155 in Not by Politics Alone: The Enduring
Influence of the Christian Right. New York: The
Guilford Press.
National Abortion Federation. Clinic Violence.
http://www.prochoice.org.

African Americans
Conspiracy theory, urban legend, and rumor have
played an important role in African American culture from its beginnings. Recent decades have seen
a spate of conspiracy theories emerge from the
African American community concerning everything from the origin of AIDS to supposedly racist
clothes designers and restaurant owners. Whatever
the possible validity of these stories, these conspiracy theories have served as a way of voicing frustration and suspicion in an increasingly complex
social world, one in which racism may not be condoned by the government, but is still acutely felt by
many in the black community. But such stories are
not products solely of their time; they emerge out

of a tradition that began with the first contact
between Africans and Europeans.
As folklorist Patricia Turner notes in her book I
Heard It through the Grapevine, a study of the role
of rumor and legend in the African American community, the telling of conspiracy-minded stories has
been a central way for blacks (and whites) to understand their circumstances. At the outset of the slave
trade, for example, Africans who were taken aboard
slave ships had difficulty comprehending both their
immediate situation and their captors’ intentions.
The one explanation they found plausible was that
these strange-looking white men were cannibals
searching for food. Likewise, the Europeans presumed that all Africans must be cannibals, given
their seemingly primitive nature.
From this basis was born a long line of anecdotes,
rumors, and beliefs (many of them well founded)
among African Americans about the animosity that
at least some whites bore toward them, and their
powerlessness in the social, economic, and political
systems in which they found themselves. In particular, a theme that emerges from the earliest rumors
about European cannibalism and continues in
recent years through the conspiracy theories about
the spread of crack cocaine is the understanding
that the black (usually male) body is a site of contention between blacks and whites.
Historical Context for
Conspiracy Theories
The events of U.S. history have provided a context
in which such beliefs make sense: the institution of
chattel slavery itself, in which the black body was
the property of a white owner and could be worked
and physically punished until it gave out; lynchings
that became nearly common events in the South in
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries
(often sparked by a suspicion that a black male had
had, or intended to have, sexual relations with a
white woman); the stories emerging from World
War II of black soldiers being given particularly
dangerous assignments more regularly than their
white counterparts; the Tuskegee experiments in
which black males were intentionally infected with
syphilis; the willingness of law enforcement officers
35

African Americans

in the South not only to deny rights to blacks, but
also to attack demonstrators with fire hoses and
dogs during the civil rights movement of the 1950s
and 1960s; the disproportionate number of poor
blacks sent to fight in Vietnam; and the ongoing
incidents of police violence against blacks, particularly in the inner cities. In these cases, it isn’t simply
that blacks are the victims of racism, but that this
racism fuels institutionalized physical attacks against
individual African Americans, attacks that often end
in death. The assassinations of Malcolm X and Martin Luther King, Jr., in the 1960s, as well as the Rodney King beating in 1991, have served as representative examples of the violence that may befall
blacks who seem to defy or challenge the system.
A Century of Conspiracies
The U.S. Civil War and the end of chattel slavery
brought increased interaction among African
Americans and whites, and with it an increasing
number of conspiracy theories among both groups.
In fact, one of the most persistent conspiracy theories to circulate in the African American community
emerged at the time of emancipation. The threat of
possible black ownership of southern land was used
by the Confederacy to rally support for its cause
among whites. Belief in this possibility spread so
widely that by the time the war ended, many former
slaves themselves were convinced that the federal
government would supply them with a parcel of
land. The promise of “40 acres and a mule” to each
freed slave was never actually made, but the belief
that the government both made and broke this
promise became so entrenched in African American culture that it continues to be cited as evidence
of the systematic betrayal of African Americans by
the U.S. government.
With the abolition of slavery came greater
mobility and opportunities for African Americans.
Yet, much of the underlying racism and animosity
that had allowed slavery to exist in the first place
remained. African Americans often found themselves in communities that did not welcome them.
Inevitably, racial tensions arose from the fear, suspicion, and animosity felt by both blacks and whites
in the postslavery United States.
36

The migration of many southern blacks during the
late 1800s and early 1900s to the large urban areas of
the North seems to have sparked a number of incidents in which conspiracy theory and racially motivated violence fueled each other. The riots of East
St. Louis, Missouri (1917), and Chicago, Illinois
(1919), were both precipitated in part by rumors of
racial violence. In St. Louis, a meeting of white
laborers concerned about losing their jobs to African
Americans led to violence when rumors circulated
that a black man had recently killed or assaulted
whites (the rumors ranged from an accidental shooting of a white man to the murder of two white girls).
A month of sporadic violence followed, with both
blacks and whites believing that the other group was
planning a wholesale massacre. When the violence
erupted into a full-scale race riot, a large number of
blacks were killed and mutilated by white mobs. The
exact number of fatalities was itself the subject of
conspiracy theories: many blacks felt that the official
death toll was kept low to minimize the savagery of
white violence, while some whites felt blacks were
trying to inflate the list of fatalities by claiming that
people who had fled the city had been killed and disposed of.
Similar rumors of violence sparked a race riot in
Chicago in 1919. After weeks of growing racial tension and suspicion, violence erupted when a black
boy drowned at a segregated beach when he accidentally drifted into the white swimming area.
Some white bathers threw stones to drive him
away, and although there was no evidence that any
of these hit the boy, the rumor circulated among
African Americans at the scene that the boy had
been killed by rock-throwing whites while the
police looked on. Several days of violence followed.
Race riots also emerged in Detroit, Michigan, in
1943, as well as Harlem, New York, in 1935 and
1943. Again, rumors of assault, rape, or murder of
a member of one group by individuals of the other
race served as the spark for the violence. And
again, the rumors were found to be either baseless,
or at least exaggerated.
These cases of rumors precipitating violence suggest that conspiracy theories have provided a way of
giving shape and specificity to free-floating racial

African Americans

Jesse Jackson, leader of the Rainbow Coalition, speaks at a United for AIDS Action demonstration in New York City.
Fifty thousand people turned out for the 1992 event in Times Square. (ChromoSohm/Corbis)

anxieties within local communities. However, these
rumors also contributed to conspiracy theory
becoming a larger theme in African American political discourse. As Turner points out in her work,
even blacks who did not have any specific knowledge
of the riots in St. Louis, Chicago, Detroit, Harlem, or
other similar events still were familiar with the
themes expressed in the rumors that emerged from
them: that the lives and bodies of blacks were not
valued by whites and that violence by whites against
blacks was seen as acceptable by society.
From early in the twentieth century, various
African American leaders and groups have used

conspiracy theories to explain the larger subjection
of blacks in U.S. society. Marcus Garvey, Elijah
Muhammad, Malcolm X, and Louis Farrakhan,
among many others, have suggested that the social,
political, and economic struggles facing blacks
were the result of concerted efforts by the white
majority to keep them from their rightful place in
society. Such theories became accepted tenets of
more militant groups such as the Nation of Islam
and the Black Panther Party.
In the 1980s and 1990s, a series of conspiracy theories emerged from the African American community that suggested specific ways in which the racism
37

African Americans

of U.S. society at large was still affecting blacks. One
genre of theory involved supposed ties between
companies that catered to the black community and
racist organizations, particularly the Ku Klux Klan.
One conspiracy theory suggested that the Troop
Sport clothing company, a manufacturer of sportswear that was popular in urban areas, was owned and
run by the KKK. Versions of this theory suggested
that tags or messages hidden on or in the clothing
contained racist threats and slurs. The shoe manufacturer Reebok was also alleged to have racist ties. It
was suggested that the producer of popular athletic
shoes was owned or financially tied to the white government of South Africa and supporters of apartheid.
A related theory emerged in 1991, claiming that
Liz Claiborne, the founder of the clothing company of the same name, had appeared on Oprah
Winfrey’s talk show and made racist comments.
She was alleged to have suggested that she did not
make clothes for black women because they could
not wear the same sizes as white women and that
she simply did not like the idea of making clothes
for blacks. Although Liz Claiborne had never
appeared on Winfrey’s show (and was no longer
associated with the clothing company at the time of
the rumor’s appearance), the allegations were
repeated as fact by many, including film director
Spike Lee, who called for a boycott of Liz Claiborne clothing by African American women. A
nearly identical theory surfaced a few years later,
replacing Liz Claiborne with Tommy Hilfiger
A second genre of conspiracy theory also suggested links between businesses catering to the
black community and racists, but added the assertion that these companies were not simply exploiting
African Americans economically but also were causing them physical harm. These included the longstanding urban legend that Kentucky Fried Chicken
restaurants served rat meat to some customers. In
this case, the allegation was that “Kentucky Fried
Rat” was intentionally served to black customers.
Another fried chicken restaurant chain, Church’s
Fried Chicken, also became the subject of a conspiracy theory. It was suggested that the company
(whose franchises were located primarily in urban
areas and had a sizable black customer base) was
38

owned by racist whites who added an ingredient to
the chicken that would cause black men to become
sterile. A parallel theory held that the makers of
Tropical Fantasy, a low-cost soft drink marketed
principally in largely black urban areas, was owned
by the KKK and added an ingredient to its product
that would sterilize or cause impotence in black
men. Yet another rumor suggested that Kool cigarettes contained an additive that caused sterility in
black men.
Although no evidence emerged to confirm these
rumors, they remained popular beliefs among
many African Americans. Many cited the Tuskegee
experiments on black men as evidence that attacks
on African American males, particularly in ways
that directly affected their reproductive capacity,
were a way in which whites attempted to limit or
destroy the African American population.
The Government as Enemy
While the conspiracy theories involving private
companies suggested ties between them and
overtly racist organizations such as the KKK, other
theories asserted that the U.S. government itself
had genocidal ambitions against blacks. Such theories hark back to the time of institutionalized slavery when the government allowed African Americans to be bought and sold, as well as the “broken
promise” of 40 acres and a mule. Contemporary
visions of the government as the enemy of African
Americans include the theory that the murders of
several African American boys and young men in
Atlanta from 1979 to 1981 were not the work of
Wayne Williams, the black man accused and eventually convicted of the murders. These crimes were
believed to have been part of a conspiracy planned
by the Center for Disease Control, the FBI, and/or
the CIA to collect interferon from the genitalia of
black males for use in medical experiments (a theory that was deemed plausible by comedian/activist
Dick Gregory and writer James Baldwin).
Other government-centered conspiracy legends
include the allegations that poor black women who
visit healthcare centers are routinely sterilized or
given long-term birth-control implants without
their knowledge, as a means of controlling the

African Americans

black population. A more popular belief is that the
AIDS virus is part of a government plan to target
the inner cities with a deadly disease to limit their
populations. The most widely circulated of such
theories is the charge that drugs (crack cocaine in
particular) were purposely introduced to inner-city
communities by government agencies as a means
to destroy the black community.
Variations of each of these conspiracy theories
suggest a wide range of government culpability.
Those suggesting a weak link between the federal
government and conspiracies against African
Americans suggest that the government, while not
actually creating the problem (e.g., introducing the
HIV virus or crack cocaine into the black community as biological weapons), has willingly allowed
these crises to run their course without attempting
to solve the problem. As long as these phenomena
are primarily affecting black Americans, the reasoning goes, the government is content to practice
a type of malevolent neglect.
Versions of these theories that suggest the
strongest possible connection between the government and attacks against African Americans hold
that not only are such acts a willful attempt at genocide, but that government agencies are actually
demonic forces of supernatural evil. One such theory alleged that a numerological analysis of the
name “Ronald Wilson Reagan” proves that the
president was an agent of the Antichrist. Since
each of his three names contains six letters (i.e.,
“666”), the president was linked to the mark of the
beast as described in the Book of Revelation.
Another genre of conspiracy theory involving
oppression of African Americans by the government
suggests that the government often attacks the black
community indirectly through discrediting highprofile leaders or groups. Again, such theories have
historical precedents. It is now known that the FBI
routinely carried out surveillance on civil rights
leaders, including Martin Luther King, Jr., and
actively attempted to destabilize the Black Panthers.
Such historical realities lend credence to suggestions
that highly visible African Americans are subjected
to disinformation campaigns conducted by largely
white government agencies. When Washington,

D.C., mayor Marion Barry was arrested in a drugrelated sting operation, it was suggested that he had
been “set up” by whites who wanted to embarrass
and harass influential African Americans.
Similar allegations surrounded the conviction of
boxer Mike Tyson for rape.
During the riots in Los Angeles that followed the
acquittal of the police officers charged with the
beating of Rodney King, a widely circulated rumor
suggested that the Los Angeles police were allowing
the riots to continue in order to make the black community look bad. Perhaps the best-known example
of this genre of conspiracy theory is that of the arrest
and trial of O. J. Simpson for the murder of his exwife. Polls showed that many blacks believed the
former football star had been framed by racist members of the Los Angeles Police Department.
A recurring theme in African American conspiracy theories is the physicality of the attacks they
describe. The black body itself is portrayed as the
site of struggle. The attack may involve the clothes
that cover the body (e.g., the Troop Sport, Reebok,
and Liz Claiborne theories), or may attack the body
itself (e.g., the Church’s Fried Chicken and Tropical Fantasy theories). The physical attacks range
from indirect attempts at limiting the black population (as with the theories involving sterilization)
to overt murder and genocide (as in the explanation for the Atlanta child murders and some versions of the AIDS-as-biological-weapon theory).
The theories involving crack cocaine and other
drugs in some ways combine these various motifs.
The drug trade economically exploits poor blacks.
It also leads to their death in many cases (through
overdoses, drug-related crime, etc.). Finally, it provides an excuse for institutional control of the black
body, such as the incarceration of large numbers of
African Americans (mostly young males) and
mandatory drug tests for inner-city mothers as a
prerequisite for prenatal care.
The Popularity and Ramifications
of Conspiracy Theory
Surveys suggest that conspiracy theories of one sort
or another are taken seriously by a significant percentage of the African American population. The
39

Agent Orange

Southern Christian Leadership Conference conducted a survey in 1991 in which 35 percent of the
respondents believed that AIDS was a form of genocide, and another 30 percent said they were not sure.
A poll done by the New York Times and WCBS-TV
found that 77 percent of the black respondents felt
that there was at least some truth to the allegation
that the government targeted black elected officials
for investigations as a way to discredit them. The
same poll showed that 70 percent of black respondents believed the government intentionally allowed
drugs into urban, largely black neighborhoods as a
way of harming those who lived there.
The ramifications of this popularity of conspiracy
theories among many African Americans are a point
of debate among those who have studied the phenomenon. For some, the distortions and untruths
they see at the heart of many such theories are stumbling blocks to true social and political progress.
Conspiracy theories undermine the sense of empowerment and responsibility necessary to solve the
actual problems. Occasionally, such as in the case of
AIDS, the suspicion and misinformation communicated in conspiracy theories can have disastrous
effects on both individuals and the larger community.
Others argue that conspiracy theory is a cultural
practice that has played an important role in the
continuing struggle of African Americans to understand their place in a society that is often hostile.
Racism, particularly in its institutionalized forms,
has been a conspiracy of sorts that has targeted
people of African descent in America from the earliest days of colonial settlement.
Specific conspiracy theories may or may not be
supported by the evidence, but even those that are
demonstrably false are mistaken only in their particulars. They accurately describe the situation
many blacks find themselves in and provide valuable social knowledge by making explicit (even if in
a metaphorical manner) the very real forces of
racism that must be recognized and overcome in
order to succeed in society.
Ted Remington
See also: AIDS; Cocaine; Farrakhan, Louis;
Muhammad, Elijah; Nation of Islam.

40

References
Fine, Gary Alan, and Patricia A. Turner. 2001.
Whispers on the Color Line: Rumor and Race in
America. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Goldberg, Robert. 2001. Enemies Within: The
Culture of Conspiracy in Modern America. New
Haven, CT, and London: Yale University Press.
Knight, Peter. 2000. Conspiracy Culture: From the
Kennedy Assassination to The X-Files. London
and New York: Routledge.
Quinn, Eithne. “‘All Eyez on Me’: The Paranoid
Style of Tupac Shakur.” Pp. 177–201 in
Conspiracy Nation, ed. Peter Knight. New York:
New York University Press.
Turner, Patricia. 1992. I Heard It through the
Grapevine: Rumor in African-American Culture.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

Agent Orange
A herbicide used as part of the of the U.S. Military
Assistance Command, Vietnam’s (MACV) 1962–
1970 defoliation campaign in Vietnam, Agent
Orange (along with Agents Blue, Green, Pink, Purple, and White) was utilized to reduce dense jungle
foliage that might be used as enemy cover and to
destroy food crops that might sustain Communist
forces. As with the later Gulf War, Vietnam veterans have accused the government (and the companies that supplied the product) of allowing service
personnel to be used as unwitting guinea pigs in
the introduction of an untested chemical weapon,
and then engaging in a cover-up about the extent of
the problem.
The chemical became a technological fix in an
attempt to wage an inexpensive and uncomplicated
counterinsurgency campaign, in lieu of seriously
addressing the problem of denying enemy access to
food supplies and concealment by jungle foliage. In
addition to its tactical uses, Agent Orange was also
used in the clearing of U.S. base camp perimeters
and other militarily sensitive areas. From 1965 to
1971, 3.2 percent of the cultivated land and 46.4
percent of the forest in Vietnam were sprayed with
defoliants—approximately 3 percent of the Vietnamese population lived in defoliated areas. Of the
herbicides used by the U.S. military, Agent Orange
had the reputation of being one of the most effec-

Agent Orange

A C-123 completes an Operation Ranchhand mission during the Vietnam War. The aerial spraying of herbicides such as
Agent Orange, code-named Operation Ranchhand, led to health claims by veterans and civilians who suffered ill effects
from exposure to the chemicals. (Department of Defense)

tive chemicals in defoliating inland and mangrove
forests and the best herbicide for the rainy season
(due to its oil-soluble composition). Due to this,
between 1965 and 1970, approximately 11.2 million
gallons of Agent Orange were dumped on Vietnam,
Laos, and Cambodia. The majority of this was
sprayed from specially equipped C-123 aircraft during Operation Ranchhand, with smaller amounts
coming from helicopters, boats, trucks, and even

backpack-sized units worn by individual soldiers.
Ranchhand defoliated approximately 4,747,587
acres of forest and destroyed 481,897 acres of crops.
Agent Orange contained the chemicals n-butyl
esters of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) and
2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T) as well as
varying amounts of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzop-dioxin (TCDD), a member of the dioxin group.
TCDD is considered to be one of the most toxic
41

AIDS

chemicals known to mankind, with sufficient evidence of an association between exposure to the
defoliant and chloracne, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma,
Hodgkin’s disease, and soft-tissue sarcoma. There is
also suggestive evidence of an association between
Agent Orange and respiratory cancers (lung, larynx,
trachea), prostate cancer, multiple myeloma, acute
and subacute peripheral neuropathy, spina bifida,
and porphyria cutanea tarda. The results of three
epidemiological studies also suggest that a father’s
exposure to herbicides may put his children at a
greater risk of being born with spina bifida.
In addition to untold numbers of Vietnamese
civilians and soldiers, many U.S. military personnel
were exposed to Agent Orange during the Vietnam
War. Vietnam veterans and their family members
brought a class-action lawsuit against seven manufacturers of Agent Orange that was settled out of
court by the establishment of a fund to compensate
those exposed for any resulting disabilities. The
total number of U.S. military personnel exposed to
herbicides in Southeast Asia is unknown, but it is
estimated that the number lies somewhere
between 2.6 and 3.8 million.
Nicholas Turse
See also: Gulf War Syndrome.
References
Clodfelter, Michael. 1995. Vietnam in Military
Statistics: A History of the Indochina Wars,
1772–1991. Jefferson, NC: McFarland and
Company, Inc.
Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. 2001. “Agent
Orange.” http://www.bartleby.com/65/ag/
AgentOra.html.
Institute of Medicine (U.S.). Committee to Review
the Health Effects in Vietnam Veterans of
Exposure to Herbicides. 1999. Veterans and
Agent Orange: Update 1998. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
Krepinevich, Andrew F. 1986. The Army and
Vietnam. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press.

AIDS
In the last twenty years, one of the most wellknown, enduring, and highly contentious conspir42

acy theories has surrounded the emergence of
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS).
Essentially, this theory proposes that HIV was a
human-made virus and was either accidentally, or
more likely deliberately, introduced into the
human population. But beyond this consensus,
AIDS conspiracy theories come in a wide variety of
forms, especially around the objectives and targets
of the conspiracy. Among the issues raised by AIDS
conspiracy theories are the relation between science and politics, the history of chemical and biological warfare, race and genocide, and the effects
of conspiracy theories in general on health, behavior, and politics.
Almost since the beginning of the AIDS crisis,
conspiracy theories were among the explanations
that were used to try to account for this new mysterious disease. While official virologists and others
were isolating the HIV/HTLV virus in France and
the United States, the account of its origin was (and
still is) debated. The Green Monkey Hypothesis
(the belief that the virus jumped species in Africa)
was becoming dominant during late 1980s. Also
receiving publicity at this time was the conspiracytinged conservative moralism that blamed the victims of AIDS for sinful behavior. But as far back as
1983 stickers appeared in gay urban districts (like
the Castro area in San Francisco) proclaiming that
AIDS emerged from a government laboratory, not
the gay community. Helped along by the gay press
and word of mouth, the theory that AIDS was
human-made began to receive attention.
In 1984, the Indian newspaper the New Delhi
Patriot charged that AIDS was a genetically engineered agent. Citing an anonymous U.S. anthropologist as well as U.S. Army research literature, the
article asserted that HIV was created at the U.S.
Army’s Biological Warfare Laboratory at Fort Detrick, Maryland. About a year later, a Soviet journal
picked up the story and began to cover the allegations regularly. This series, along with a Pravda cartoon depicting a U.S. scientist exchanging a vial containing the AIDS virus for money from a U.S.
military man, made the AIDS conspiracy theory vulnerable to the charge of being Soviet disinformation.
But soon a number of researchers and doctors on

AIDS

both sides of the Iron Curtain began to investigate
the murky origins of AIDS. The following sections
elaborate the variety of conspiracy theories that
emerged from these investigations.
The Early Researchers
In 1986 East German scientists Jakob and Lilli
Segal self-published a fifty-two-page pamphlet
titled AIDS: USA Home-Made Evil. In it they
introduce the splice theory of HIV, which most
subsequent conspiracy theories adopt. In essence,
the splice theory argues that HIV is a result of the
scientifically engineered, artificial splicing of two
or more already existing viruses (both human and
other animal). In the Segals’ account, an artificial
splice between a visna (sheep) virus and a human
one (HTLV-1) produced HIV. The Segals claimed
that this splice was performed at Fort Detrick,
Maryland (the U.S. military base for chemical and
biological weapons research and development),
thereby introducing the chemical-biological warfare (CBW) context to explain AIDS. However, the
Segals did not promote the idea that the virus was
deliberately introduced into the general populace.
They argued that the virus was tested on some U.S.
prison inmates, who accidentally spread it to New
York’s gay community. The Segals blamed the epidemic on general U.S. malfeasance, especially the
unethical use of scientific experiments, and called
for more scientific research into the matter.
The Segals’ claims were dismissed by some as
KGB disinformation and embraced by others who
used the research for their own theories. Perhaps
the most infamous of these followers is Dr. William
C. Douglass. His book, AIDS: The End of Civilization, accepted the visna/HTLV splice theory and its
origin at Fort Detrick, but asserted that the virus
was deliberately introduced into the populace. Douglass believed that AIDS was a Communist plot to
destroy Western civilization, and that Soviet agents
in the U.S. scientific and military communities were
responsible for its creation. In addition, Douglass
added the claim (which others subsequently picked
up) that the World Health Organization (WHO)
orchestrated HIV’s spread in Africa, while the Center for Disease Control (CDC) was responsible for

its spread in the United States. He also asserted that
AIDS could be contracted through casual contact
(e.g., mosquitoes and saliva). Douglass’s work concludes with a call to boost law-and-order measures
in the United States (including quarantining HIVpositive people), dismantling the WHO and the
United Nations, and fighting communism in general. In an ironic twist, the Segals’ theory, which was
labeled KGB propaganda by some, was turned into
an anticommunist conspiracy theory.
Another influential conspiracy theorist in this
vein is Dr. Robert Strecker, head of the Strecker
Group. Strecker’s major work is a low-budget video
titled The Strecker Memorandum, which was made
available via mail-order. The video primarily consists of Strecker lecturing to a handful of people
(including the video’s producer) and explaining his
theory on a chalkboard. Strecker argues there that
HIV is a result of a visna virus being spliced with a
bovine (cow) virus, and that this new virus was
deliberately introduced into the populace via vaccine programs by the WHO in Africa and the CDC
in the United States. Strecker also promoted the
casual contact model of the virus, believing that
AIDS was contagious—a kind of viral cancer (and
that there were at least six different varieties of
AIDS). Strecker only insinuated that a Communist
plot was behind AIDS, instead placing the history
of unethical experimentation on humans in a CBW
context. Strecker called for research into electromagnetic cures and a curtailing of intravenous drug
use, sexual promiscuity, and blood products.
Both Strecker and Jakob Segal were interviewed
for a Sunday Express (London) story on 26 October 1986. This British tabloid story was the first
time a prominent Western paper had published an
AIDS-as-biowarfare theory without ridicule, and it
engendered a hostile response by the U.S. State
Department (which accused the New Delhi newspaper that published the earlier AIDS biowarfare
story of being a Communist front). Six months
later, on 11 May 1987, the Times (London) carried
a cover story linking AIDS to the WHO’s African
smallpox vaccine programs.
Strecker and the Segals influenced Dr. Alan
Cantwell, who gave this conspiracy theory a new
43

AIDS

political angle. Cantwell is perhaps the most prolific
of AIDS conspiracy theorists, beginning with the
books AIDS: The Mystery and the Solution, AIDS
and the Doctors of Death, and The Secret AIDS
Genocide Plot and continuing into the twenty-first
century with numerous articles in publications such
as Paranoia and Steamshovel Press. While Cantwell
agrees that HIV was human-made (though he
leaves the possibility open that it is an old virus),
deliberately introduced into humans, and spread via
the WHO and the CDC, he does not agree with the
right-wing politics of some of his colleagues.
Instead, Cantwell claims that the “military-medicalindustrial complex” involved in CBW is responsible
for AIDS. Cantwell introduces the idea that the
objective of AIDS is genocide, especially against
gays. He also adds that one of the side effects of this
genocidal program is the introduction of a New
World Order. Cantwell calls for better education,
better health practitioners, and fighting back against
power to stop the epidemic. In a similar vein, G. J.
Krupey (whose conspiracy research does not focus
primarily on AIDS) has perhaps the hypothesis closest to a left-wing AIDS conspiracy theory. In his
article “AIDS: Act of God or the Pentagon?” Krupey follows Cantwell’s model, but adds that an
AIDS panic could potentially justify the suspension
of civil liberties and the installation of martial law.
Krupey states that a radical cure is needed, one that
is not just medical, but political. A structural change
in governing practices is required in which access
and participation are opened up on a far more democratic scale.
While the early researchers came from a variety of
medical professions, geographical locations, and
political positions, what unites them is the fact that
they criticize science’s connection to corruption and
military research (CBW) yet rely on scientific evidence to prove their own conspiracy theories. In
addition, most of the conspiracy theories cite the
1969 congressional testimony of Dr. Donald
MacAruthur, deputy director for the Department of
Defense’s research and technology. Speaking to the
House of Representatives Subcommittee on Defense
Appropriations with regard to military chemical and
biological warfare programs, MacArthur was speak44

ing on the subject of synthetic biological agents.
Asked about the feasibility, time, and cost of producing a synthetic biological agent, MacArthur responded: “Within the next five to ten years, it would
probably be possible to make a new infective microorganism which could differ in certain important
aspects from any known disease causing organisms.
Most important of these is that it might be refractory
to the immunological and therapeutic processes
upon which we depend to maintain our relative freedom from infectious disease.” For the conspiracy
researchers, MacArthur was essentially calling for a
new synthetic virus that would attack the human
immune system, and his words predated the AIDS
epidemic by ten years. This testimony, along with the
general history of overt and covert biowarfare
research (which became officially banned in the early
1970s, while becoming privatized for defense purposes), of scientific experimentation on unwitting
subjects, and of calls for global population control,
brings together the early conspiracy theories.
The Nonviral Theories
Another set of theories emerged in the 1980s that
have been classified as conspiracy theories, even
though they share little with the above theories.
These are the nonviral theories of AIDS, whose
most well-known proponents are Dr. Peter Duesberg (Why We Will Never Win the War on AIDS,
1994, and Inventing the AIDS Virus, 1996), Jon
Lauritsen (The AIDS War: Propaganda, Profiteering
and Genocide from the Medical Industrial Complex,
1993), Jad Adams (AIDS: The HIV Myth, 1989), and
Jon Rappaport (AIDS, Incorporated: The Scandal of
the Century, 1988). Nonviral theories posit multifactorial causes of AIDS (combination of drugs,
behavioral practices, social factors—malnutrition,
pollution) and even multi-diseases (that AIDS is
often a misdiagnosis of various other conditions).
Purposeful targeting of groups is not usually a major
component of nonviral theories. Rather than conspiracy, they emphasize collusion (medical, pharmaceutical, and governmental institutions) and coverup (countervailing evidence is ignored and
suppressed because it might threaten research funding and careers of mainstream scientists). These

AIDS

nonviral theories concern the origins of AIDS, while
AIDS conspiracy theories concern the origins of
HIV. They often get lumped together with conspiracy theories because of their marginal, dissident status in the scientific community, along with their critical stance toward the corruption of that community.
African American Genocide Theories
Probably the most publicized of AIDS conspiracy
theories is the African American genocide theory.
This theory in general claims that AIDS was created to exterminate blacks, both African Americans
as well as Africans. It is a theory espoused by the
Nation of Islam’s medical director, by celebrities
Spike Lee, Bill Cosby, and John Singleton, and by
numerous radio talk-shows such as Black Liberation Radio. Representative texts of this theory
include Haki R. Madhubuti’s essay, “AIDS: the
Purposeful Destruction of the Black World?”
which appears in his 1990 book Black Men: Obsolete, Single, Dangerous? Here Madhubuti uses the
work of Douglass and Strecker, placing it in the
context of the history of scientific experimentation
on blacks (especially the Tuskegee experiment). In
this version, CBW is linked to the systematic
oppression of Africans around the world, and HIV
is the latest weapon in this deliberate genocide.
African American genocide theories of AIDS
have engendered the largest response to AIDS
conspiracy theories. Health educators have cited
these conspiracy theories as an obstacle to trust in
their efforts. Most disturbing for the educators is
the link between conspiracy theories and a belief in
casual contact. A study on how suspicion of government activities regarding AIDS impacts on
behavior was carried out by social psychologists
Gregory M. Herek and John P. Capitanio. The
study correlates AIDS-related distrust to beliefs
about casual-contact transmission and to personalrisk reduction behaviors. It found that beliefs
about casual contact were not related to beliefs in
the genocidal purpose of AIDS, but the authors
still speculated that the lack of trust in health educators springs from suspicions about malicious
intent on the part of the government. In a separate
study, Stephen Thomas and Sandra Crouse Quinn

argue that public health professionals must recognize that African Americans’ belief in AIDS-asgenocide is a legitimate attitudinal barrier with an
understandable basis in history (including the
Tuskegee experiment). The authors call for a dialogue in order to develop and implement HIV education programs that are scientifically sound, culturally sensitive, and ethnically sensitive.
Health behavior has not been the only concern
when it comes to African American conspiracy theories. Coupled with the CIA-crack conspiracy theory, the AIDS conspiracy account has been defined
as part of “black paranoia,” whether as a collective
psychological state of mind or an “understandable”
historical and social phenomenon. One politically
inflected version of this approach is David Gilbert’s
1996 cover story in Covert Action Quarterly,
“Tracking the Real Genocide: AIDS—Conspiracy
or Unnatural Disaster?” Gilbert’s article makes the
provocative claim that conspiracy theories are both
politically disabling and health endangering. He
provides a two-tiered critique of these beliefs—scientific and political (but focusing on the latter). By
diverting attention from the social conditions and
economic structures that shape the contemporary
AIDS crisis, conspiracy theories perform a disservice to their promoters. Gilbert essentially argues
that conspiracy theories contribute to the toll of
unnecessary AIDS deaths. Unlike more mainstream criticisms of African American AIDS conspiracy theories, Gilbert’s argument does not dismiss them as paranoid. He depicts them as
misguided, but with deadly effects.
The responses to African American AIDS conspiracy theories demonstrate the response to AIDS
conspiracy theories more generally. David Gilbert
follows other political progressives’ and activists’
perspective in their concern over conspiracy theories. John S. James, an AIDS activist, argued in
1986 that germ warfare conspiracy theories were
not useful. Even if the theories were proven true,
according to James, the result would be punishing
the guilty, not saving lives. Conspiracy theory distracts from a better use of political and educational
activism, which is to inform the public about the
neglect and mismanagement of treatment research.
45

AIDS

When the New York Native folded in 1997, the gay
news magazine was credited with pioneering AIDS
coverage in the early 1980s, as well as criticized as a
forum for conspiracy theories.
For James, as for many others, the conspiracy is
a conspiracy of silence, a pattern of ignorance
about and mismanagement of AIDS treatment
research by scientists, government officials, doctors, and journalists. Cultural theorist and activist
Simon Watney echoes this sentiment when he
argues that AIDS may not be a conscious policy to
exterminate gay men, but the long-term consequences of government action and inaction may
have the same effects as if it were intentional. Watney suggests that origin stories may be irrelevant to
the crisis. Moreover, for many activists, alternative
origin stories have a strong link to oppressive reactionary agendas (e.g., Duesberg).
Recent Developments
In the past few years, AIDS conspiracy theories have
connected with other conspiracy theories, influenced political activism, and have gone global. Dr.
Leonard Horowitz’s tome Emerging Viruses: AIDS
and Ebola—Nature, Accident, or Intentional? represents a synthesis of previous theories. Horowitz
links the CBW context to black genocide, but the
overall context is a history of U.S. political wrongdoing (including the Nazi roots of the CIA, intimidation of domestic dissenters, global populationcontrol programs, and foreign-policy misconduct
leading to a New World Order). Horowitz also
founded and heads Tetrahedron, Inc., a nonprofit
educational corporation, which provides employee
assistance and education, professional development
seminars, and health education products and programs, and organizes Horowitz’s extensive lecture
tours. He has implemented his conspiracy theory
into an organization devoted to educational reform,
political activism, and health awareness.
Another example of conspiracy theories affecting political activism is the case of the Brotherly
Lovers, an AIDS activist group based in Pittsburgh, who have attempted to spearhead a classaction petition for a government investigation into
the possible artificial, biowarfare origin of HIV.
46

AIDS conspiracy theories have also been integrated into other popular conspiracy theories. In
an article entitled “The AIDS-ET Connection”
Phillip S. Duke claims to furnish a unifying hypothesis about AIDS—the gray alien agenda. The goal
of this agenda is to rid the earth of human life and
establish an alien settlement. In this theory, AIDS
has been deliberately introduced into the human
population by these aliens as a way of freeing up
space for colonization. Bill Cooper, prominent late
U.S. conspiracy theorist, has also suggested that
CBW may be part of an alien agenda.
Cooper’s work is even more significant because in
2000 it was cited as an influence on a South African
health minister’s account of AIDS in Africa. At the
same time, the South African president, Thabo
Mbeki, controversially suggested that Duesberg’s
nonviral theory should be studied as a possible
explanation for the continuing tragedy in Africa.
Most recently, Edward Hooper’s best-selling The
River has created newfound controversy with its
claims that HIV originated in the 1950s with the vaccination of over a million African children. Hooper
does not claim that AIDS was deliberately created
and spread by humans, but that an experimental
form of oral polio vaccine was contaminated with
SIV (the ancient simian equivalent of HIV), and this
negligence led to the current AIDS epidemic.
Responses
AIDS conspiracy theories raise the general issue of
science in relation to both conspiracy theories and
their critics. When is science questioned, and when
is it cited as evidence? Such AIDS conspiracy theorists as Cantwell, Strecker, Douglass, and
Horowitz have drifted away from conventional science to the marginal status of “renegade” scientists,
but their narratives retain scientific techniques.
They seek authority through their own pedigrees,
they conduct research, and their reports contain
the language and styles of citation and evidence
employed in mainstream AIDS science. The most
recent debates over Edward Hooper’s The River
revive the question of how alternative or dissident
scientific accounts challenge and/or support conventional science.

AIDS

In general, AIDS conspiracy theories are typically positioned as a distraction from real research
and activism. But just as there are a variety of
accounts that can be grouped under the term
AIDS conspiracy theory, so are there a variety of
responses to them. Some of the preceding sections
have demonstrated a few of those responses
(Gilbert, Fiske, James, Watney, the studies on
behavior). Others include cultural analyst Peter
Knight’s analysis of AIDS conspiracy theories as
they are related to cultural panics over the body in
the 1980s and 1990s, and John Fiske’s controversially sympathetic assessment of the AIDS-asblack-genocide account. Fiske calls the account a
“counterknowledge,” which involves reworking
facts, events, and information the dominant knowledge has repressed or dismissed as insignificant.
Above all, according to Fiske, a counterknowledge
must be socially and politically motivated. Fiske
proceeds with a series of close readings of radio
talk-show dialogues, primarily culled from Black
Liberation Radio. In these accounts, AIDS is
folded into a genocidal framework, and it is this
resonance with African American history and lived
experience that Fiske argues is lacking among
mainstream whites, and thus produces an aversion
to the concept of genocide. Fiske does not simply
affirm the truth of the genocide account. Ultimately he argues that when it comes to AIDS conspiracy theories, people need to examine their
strategies of disbelief.
As cultural theorist Paula Treichler argues, conspiracy theories are part of the larger “epidemic of
signification” that the AIDS epidemic has generated—an epidemic that must be examined, not
ignored or casually dismissed. AIDS conspiracy
theories crystallize the stakes involved in the overall problematization of conspiracy theories, especially with regard to the behavioral and political
effects of conspiracy theories.
Jack Z. Bratich
See also: African Americans; Eugenics; Health
Scares; New World Order.
References
Adams, Jad. 1989. AIDS: The HIV Myth. London:
Macmillan.

Cantwell, Jr., Alan. 1983. AIDS: The Mystery and
the Solution. Los Angeles, CA: Aries Rising Press.
———. 1988. AIDS and the Doctors of Death. Los
Angeles, CA: Aries Rising Press.
———. 1993. Queer Blood: The Secret AIDS
Genocide Plot. Los Angeles, CA: Aries Rising
Press.
———. 1996. “Virus Wars: Does HIV Cause
AIDS?” Steamshovel Press 15: 8–12.
———. 1997. “The Gulf BioWar: GWS and AIDS.”
Paranoia 5, no. 1: 30–33.
———. 1997. “AIDS: A Doctor’s Note on the ManMade Theory.” Paranoia 5, no. 2: 18–25.
Cooper, William. 1991. Behold A Pale Horse.
Sedona, AZ: Light Technology Publishing.
Douglass, William C. 1992. AIDS: The End of
Civilization. A and B Books Publishers/
Distributors.
Duesberg, Peter. 1996. Inventing the AIDS Virus.
Washington, DC: Regnery Publishing.
Duesberg, Peter, and Bryan J. Ellison. 1994. Why
We Will Never Win the War on AIDS. El Cerrito,
CA: Inside Story.
Duke, Phillip S. “The AIDS-ET Connection.”
Paranoia 6, no. 1: 51–54.
Fiske, John. 1994. Media Matters: Everyday Culture
and Political Change. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Gilbert, David. 1996. “Tracking the Real Genocide:
AIDS—Conspiracy or Unnatural Disaster?”
Covert Action Quarterly 58: 55–64.
Herek, Gregory M., and John P. Capitanio. 1994.
“Conspiracies, Contagion, and Compassion: Trust
and Public Reactions to AIDS.” AIDS Education
and Prevention 64: 365–375.
Hooper, Edward, and W. D. Hamilton. 2000. The
River: A Journey to the Source of HIV and AIDS.
Boston, MA: Back Bay Books.
Horowitz, Leonard. 1996. Emerging Viruses: AIDS
and Ebola—Nature, Accident, or Intentional?
Rockport, MA: Tetrahedron.
James, John S. 1986. “AIDS Conspiracy—Just a
Theory?” San Francisco Sentinel, 12 September.
http://www.immunet.org/atn/ZQX01301.html.
Knight, Peter. 2000. Conspiracy Culture: From the
Kennedy Assassination to The X-Files. London
and New York: Routledge.
Krupey, G. W. 1993. “AIDS: Act of God or the
Pentagon?” Pp. 240–255 in Secret and Suppressed:
Banned Ideas and Hidden History, ed. Jim Keith.
Portland, OR: Feral House. 240–255.
Lauritsen, John. 1993. The AIDS War: Propaganda,
Profiteering, and Genocide from the Medical-

47

Alien and Sedition Acts

Industrial Complex. New York: ASKLEPIOS
Press.
Madhubuti, Haki R. 1990. Black Men: Obsolete,
Single, Dangerous? The Afrikan American
Family in Transition. Chicago: Third World
Press.
Martin, Harry V. 1995. “Foundation of AIDS.”
http://www.sonic.net/sentinel/gvcon1.html.
Rappaport, Jon. 1988. AIDS Incorporated: The
Scandal of the Century. San Bruno, CA: Human
Energy Press.
Segal, Jakob, and Lilli Segal. 1986. AIDS: USA
Home-Made Evil. Self-published.
The Strecker Memorandum. 1988. Produced by
Robert Strecker. Videocassette.
Thomas, Stephen, and Sandra Crouse Quinn. 1991.
“The Tuskegee Syphilis Study, 1932 to 1972:
Implications for HIV Education and Risk
Education Programs in the Black Community.”
American Journal of Public Health 81, no. 11:
1498–1505.
Treichler, Paula A. 1999. How to Have Theory in an
Epidemic. Durham and London: Duke University
Press.
U.S. House. 1969. Committee on Appropriations.
Hearings on Department of Defense
Appropriations for 1970. 91st Cong., 1st sess.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Watney, Simon. 1994. Practices of Freedom.
Durham and London: Duke University Press.

Alien and Sedition Acts
Part of the most serious crackdown on peacetime
dissent in U.S. history, mounted amid the most
threatening crisis that the young nation ever faced,
the Alien and Sedition Acts of the 1790s also comprised the most prominent “headline event” in U.S.
history to be directly and openly rooted in fears of
conspiracy.
The XYZs of Political Paranoia in the 1790s
Although the young American republic was theoretically more stable and centralized than ever
before, the first decade under the Constitution ratified in 1789 was fraught with political fears arising
from both genuine threats and overreactions to
wholly unexpected developments.

48

Perhaps the most important of these unexpected
developments was the rapid emergence of political
divisions that matured into parties competing to
name the nation’s chief executive, a circumstance
unprecedented in world history. Although parties
are now considered a basic aspect of U.S. democracy, this was far from intended by the founders.
Believing that a republic could never survive the
strain of constant battles for power, and that good,
trustworthy leaders would never want to engage in
those battles, the framers of the Constitution
intentionally designed the new system to prevent
the development of political parties or any other
kind of organized competition for control of the
national government. The hope was that the
increased size and diversity of the territory being
governed, coupled with a multilayered structure of
representation that included an appointed senate
and an indirectly elected president, would make it
impossible for the country’s many local political
factions and interests to organize themselves sufficiently to control the national government. Without the need to please or compete for public favor,
learned, enlightened statesmen would be able to
deliberate more or less in peace at the national
capital, making wise, well-reasoned decisions for
the good of all.
To the founders, parties and other forms of organized opposition to government were inherently
conspiratorial, especially when a legitimate republican government existed. When the people already
ruled, efforts to defeat or stymie their chosen leaders were considered plots against the people themselves by cabals of “artful and designing men” out
for private gain, tyrannical power, or some other
sinister purpose. Those who followed such evil
leaders showed themselves to be mere “tools” or
“dupes,” unworthy of the rights of independent citizenship. In a comment that somewhat hyperbolically reflected the feelings of many colleagues,
Thomas Jefferson expressed revulsion at the very
idea of joining a political party: “Such an addiction
is the last degradation of a free and moral agent. If
I could not go to heaven but with a party, I would
not go there at all.”

Alien and Sedition Acts

Despite this deep aversion to parties, the choices
facing the young nation were simply too momentous and too divisive to be contained by the makeshift structure that the framers had devised. Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson and Treasury
Secretary Alexander Hamilton came into conflict
immediately over financial policy and broader matters such as the basic structure of the new government and the future character of the nation. Jefferson became convinced that Hamilton was the
leader of a “corrupt squadron” who sought “to get
rid of the limitations imposed by the constitution”
with the “ultimate object” of “a change, from the
present republican form of government, to that of
a monarchy” modeled on Great Britain’s (Jefferson,
986). Hamilton, for his part, was equally certain
that Jefferson and his lieutenant James Madison
led “a faction decidedly hostile to me and my
administration, and . . . subversive of . . . good government and . . . the union, peace and happiness of
the Country” (Hamilton, 738). Believing that they
were fighting for the very soul of the new nation,
Jefferson, Hamilton, and their respective allies
instinctively reached out for support among their
fellow politicians and the citizenry at large, eventually spawning a party conflict whether they
intended to or not.
Unfortunately, U.S. politicians of the 1790s
engaged in party politics without really ever learning to approve of the practice. They saw themselves as taking necessary if sometimes distasteful
steps to save the republic, and their opponents as
conspirators against it, plain and simple. Especially
among the Federalist supporters of the Washington and Adams administration, there was no sense
that there could be any such thing as a “loyal opposition,” and it was perhaps inevitable that steps
would be taken to curb opposition to the government when the opportunity arose.
Political paranoia became far worse in the latter
half of Washington’s presidency, when the French
Revolution grew more radical and war broke out
between France and Great Britain. The question
of which side to take in the conflict, if any, came to
define U.S. politics, and pushed foreign subversion

to the head of the list of fears. Although highly
exaggerated in practice, fears of foreign subversion
in this period were probably more plausible than at
any other time in U.S. history. The United States
was no world power in the 1790s, but occupied a
situation much closer to those of developing or
Third World nations during and after the cold war:
small, weak, and subject to harsh buffeting by
political, economic, and cultural winds coming
from the more developed world.
Revolutionary France expected U.S. support as a
sister republic and in return for France’s aid to the
U.S. during the American Revolution. Beginning
with “Citizen” Edmond Genet’s arrival in 1793,
French envoys did their best to draw Americans
into the conflict with Great Britain and influence
American politics in favor of the French cause.
Genet greeted crowds of well-wishers, handed out
military commissions, and outfitted privateers,
while later French ministers fed politically calculated information through friendly newspaper editors. The British kept a lower profile, but successfully pressed to keep the United States militarily
neutral and commercially dependent on British
trade (by means of the controversial Jay Treaty),
while staying in secret, sometimes illicit, conflict
with various U.S. officials. Republicans generally
took the side of France, or opposed closer ties to
Great Britain; the Federalists generally took the
opposite approach, and increasingly regarded
France as a dire threat to U.S. independence, the
Christian religion, and everything else they held
dear.
More important than what the French or British
actually did was the growing conviction, within
each of the emerging parties, that the other side
was working, out of greed or fanaticism, in treasonous collusion with a foreign aggressor. Republicans regarded the Federalists as the “British party”
and their leader Jefferson infamously labeled
Washington, Hamilton, and Adams as traitors (in
an inadvertently published letter), “men who were
Samsons in the field & Solomons in the council,
but who have had their heads shorn by the harlot
England” (Jefferson, 1037). However, the Federal-

49

Alien and Sedition Acts

ists gave far more than they got in this respect, calling their opponents “Jacobins” after the most radical, conspiratorial, and ultimately bloodthirsty faction of the French Revolution. This was equal parts
a venomous partisan label and a sincere statement
of who and what many Federalists thought was
driving the opposition to their policies, an international revolutionary conspiracy.
Through the battles over Hamilton’s financial
system, the French Revolution, and the Jay Treaty,
the incipient party conflict had matured to the
point of a contested presidential election by 1796,
pitting Vice-President John Adams against former
Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson. Deteriorating
relations with France in the wake of the Jay Treaty,
including attacks on U.S. shipping, French threats,
and the distinct possibility of war, put the Federalists in a strong position. Adams won, and soon after
the XYZ Affair inflamed the country against France
and set up the belligerent national mood that made
the Alien and Sedition Acts possible.
The Press, Immigration, and the
Origins of the Alien and Sedition Acts
The Alien and Sedition Acts were the domestic
planks of an aggressive national security program
passed by the Federalists in preparation for an allout war against France that many of them desired
but never managed to make happen. A military
build-up was also put in motion, including the construction of a fleet of war-ships and a vastly enlarged army that included forces designed to rapidly mobilize against rebellious Americans as well
as foreign invaders. This early homeland security
legislation’s specific targets were determined by
two aspects of the party conflict that disturbed the
Federalists most: the role of the press and the role
of immigrants in the growing popular opposition to
the policies of Washington, Hamilton, and Adams,
and in the democratization of U.S. political culture
more generally.
The press was seen as a powerful political
weapon that had fallen into the hands of conspirators, mercenaries, and fools. As the founders and
other U.S. politicians perceived it, the press was
the “great director of public opinion” and capable
50

of destroying any government by turning its own
people against it. “Give to any set of men the command of the press, and you give them the command of the country,” declared an influential
Pennsylvania Federalist (Addison, 1798, 18–19).
Although still a relatively primitive medium by
modern standards—a standard U.S. newspaper
featured only four pages, filled haphazardly with a
seemingly random assortment of miscellaneous
material without real headlines or illustrations—
newspapers (along with pamphlets) were thought
to have been instrumental in bringing about both
the American and French Revolutions, as well as
numerous political developments in Great Britain.
Founders on both sides of the 1790s political spectrum, including Jefferson, Hamilton, John Adams,
and Samuel Adams, had relied on the press as their
“political engine” during the movement for independence from Great Britain.
The founders began their new nation assuming
that, with British tyranny defeated and republican
government established, the press would now
serve a more passive political role. It would build
loyalty to the new regime, chiefly by providing the
people with basic information about their government’s activities, such as copies of the laws that had
been passed. As the first Washington administration gathered, it seemed more than enough when
Boston businessman John Fenno showed up in the
national capital and started the Gazette of the
United States (the G.U.S.), a would-be national
newspaper intended to “endear the general government to the people” (Pasley, 57) by printing
documents and congressional proceedings, along
with letters, essays, and even poetry hailing President Washington and Vice-President John Adams
as gods among men.
When fundamental disagreements broke out
among the leading founders, however, the press
was quickly drawn into the growing partisan conflict. To those who saw Hamilton as a not-sohidden hand guiding the country toward monarchy
and aristocracy, the G.U.S. began to seem positively sinister, an organ for government propaganda
that might be able to overbear the voters’ better
judgment. Jefferson and Madison sought to

Alien and Sedition Acts

counter the influence of the G.U.S. by helping create a new Philadelphia newspaper, the National
Gazette, to lead the public charge against Hamilton’s policies. The editor, the poet Philip Freneau
(a college friend of Madison’s), was given a no-work
job in Jefferson’s office. The newspaper provided
Jefferson with a surrogate that would fight in the
war for public opinion and still allow him to remain
above the fray and within the administration.
When he was exposed as the National Gazette’s
sponsor and confronted by President Washington,
Jefferson claimed that Freneau’s paper had “saved
our constitution” from Hamilton (Pasley, 72)
Although the National Gazette folded in 1793, it
set a number of important precedents. In some
places, it was the birthplace of the party system, since
it was in the National Gazette’s pages that the very
idea of an opposition political party (as opposed to a
mere group of like-minded legislators) was first
floated. Again and again in the following century,
politicians and parties looked to newspapers as their
primary public combatants in the bruising battles that
followed the Jefferson-Hamilton split. The Philadelphia Aurora, founded by a grandson of Benjamin
Franklin, took over as the leading Jeffersonian paper,
and around it developed a loose national network of
local newspapers that spread the opposition movement’s ideas around the country by copying from
each other. Such newspaper networks became the
primary means through which nineteenth-century
U.S. parties sought to influence the U.S. public and a
vital component of their campaigning.
The Federalists of the 1790s thought of themselves as the nation’s rightful ruling class, “the wisest and best” rather than a political faction that had
to compete for public favor and control of the government. The development of an opposition party
and an opposition press was threatening, offensive,
and patently a conspiracy. During the congressional
debates on the Sedition Act, arch-conservative congressman John Allen of Connecticut read from a
New York newspaper in which the strongest words
used against President Adams were that he was “a
person without patriotism, without philosophy” and
“a mock Monarch.” Allen flatly declared that, “If
this be not a conspiracy against Government and

people,” he did not know what a conspiracy was
(Debates and Proceedings in Congress).
The opposition press was doubly or triply bad
because of the fact it was largely manned by men
that the aristocratically minded Federalists considered thoroughly unfit to “undertake the high task
of enlightening the public mind.” Whereas in colonial times most newspaper writing was done by
men of education and social prestige—the lawyers,
ministers, and merchants of the major towns—the
political writing of 1790s fell increasingly to much
lesser sorts of men, especially the generally selfeducated artisan printers who produced the hundreds of new journals that popped up across the
country. “Too many of our Gazettes,” lamented
Rev. Samuel Miller, “are in the hands of persons
destitute at once of the urbanity of gentlemen, the
information of scholars, and the principles of
virtue” (Pasley, 198). The Alien and Sedition Acts’
strongest supporters feared a kind of social and
political subversion, in which worthy officials stood
to lose their stations and reputations to upstarts
and nobodies who would sling mud and rouse the
rabble. “It is a mortifying observation;” Judge Alexander Addison wrote in one of many published
charges to his grand jury, “that boys, blockheads,
and ruffians, are often listened to, in preference to
men of integrity, skill, and understanding” (Addison, 1800, 202–203).
Even more threatening than the printers were the
immigrants. The British government harshly
repressed the radical democracy movements that
had grown up in England, Scotland, and Ireland in
response to the French Revolution. Working-class
journalists were among the most influential activists
in those movements, and many of them were forced
into exile during the mid-1790s to avoid mobs and
jail. Not a few of these transatlantic “Jacobins,”
including the Alien and Sedition Acts victims James
Thomson Callender, William Duane, and John Daly
Burk, ended up in the port cities of the United
States, doing the work they knew best, for Democratic Republican newspapers. Duane became editor
of the Philadelphia Aurora, the Republicans’ most
widely read journal, and thus in many respects the
national voice of the party.
51

Alien and Sedition Acts

Along with the refugee journalists came a politically noticeable number of other immigrants whom
the Federalists found suspicious, especially the
Irish who became a major presence in the capital
city of Philadelphia during the 1790s. In the spring
of 1797, Federalists tried to impose a tax on certificates of naturalization, hoping to keep out what
Rep. Harrison Gray Otis of Massachusetts called
the “hordes of wild Irishmen” who might “disturb
our tranquility” (Debates and Proceedings in Congress). The Federalists’ prejudice ensured that the
Irish and other recent immigrants would become
an important voting bloc for their opponents.
Federalists feared that continued open, liberal
policies on immigration, naturalization, and political
dissent would allow the struggling monarchies of
Europe to export their political troubles to the
United States. As Otis put it, “the mass of vicious
and disorganizing characters who could not live
peaceably at home, and who, after unfurling the
standard of rebellion in their own countries, might
come hither to revolutionize ours” (Debates and
Proceedings in Congress). Although it was true that
men like Duane were having a tremendous political
impact here, the Federalists envisioned the country
as threatened with nothing less than anarchy, to be
engineered by hardened Jacobin cadres and carried
out by wild Irish mobs. Acerbic editor William Cobbett, as reactionary in the United States during this
period as he was progressive in his later British
years, painted the threat in his typically lurid palette:
From various causes these United States have
become the resting place of ninety nine hundredths
of the factious villains, which Great Britain and
Ireland have vomited from their shores. They are all
schooled in sedition, are adepts at their trade. . . .
Nothing short of a state of rebellion can content
these wretches. All governments are to them alike
hateful.Like Lucifer, they carry a hell about with
them in their own minds; and thus they prowl from
country to country. (Cobbett, 253, 256)

Although Federalist worries were usually
expressed in terms of generalized xenophobia,
some full-blown conspiracy theories began to cir52

culate as well. It was almost assumed that Republican politicians and editors, from Jefferson on
down, were allies or catspaws of the French, especially the most radical elements of the revolution.
Federalist ministers in New England promoted the
idea that the refugees and their allies were agents
of the Bavarian Illuminati, accused in Europe of
masterminding the French Revolution.
In Philadelphia, some Federalists accused the
United Irish Society, a pan-religious group devoted
to republicanism and Irish nationalism, of plotting
revolution against the United States. In the critical
interval between the XYZ revelations and the formulation of the Sedition Act, William Cobbett published a pamphlet, Detection of a Conspiracy,
Formed by the United Irishmen: with the Evident
Intention of Aiding the Tyrants of France in Subverting the Government of the United States, accusing
the group’s just-organizing U.S. chapters of planning
to gain critical positions in the government, so that
the country might be simply handed over to the
invading French. In Ireland, the United Irishmen
really did conspire with the French, and the
Philadelphia Irish community really did contain a
number of sympathizers and exiled activists. Yet
while these radical Irish republicans certainly hated
the British and blamed the Federalists for seeming to
side with Ireland’s oppressors, there is little evidence
to suggest that they had any more sinister designs on
the United States than the soon-to-be all-American
goal of throwing the Federalist rascals out of office.
The majority of Congress in 1798 did not make
this distinction between opposition politics and
conspiracy. As they saw it, the Republicans were
following exactly the formula that had turned
France into “a general slaughterhouse.” At the
beginning of the revolution in France, John Allen
recounted in arguing for the sedition bill, “those
loud and enthusiastic advocates for liberty and
equality took special care to occupy and command
all the presses.” By this means, the diabolical
French revolutionaries gained control over “the
poor, the ignorant, the passionate, and the vicious;
over all these classes the freedom of the press shed
its baneful effects, and the virtuous, the pacific,
and the rich, were their victims.” Now that this

Alien and Sedition Acts

“plague” had reached the United States, the majority of the Fifth Congress vowed not to meet the
same fate as the ancien regime in France: “The
Jacobins of our country, too, sir, are determined to
preserve in their hands the same weapon [the
press]; it is our duty to wrest it from them”
(Debates And Proceedings in Congress).
The Federalist “Reign of Terror”:
Enactment and Enforcement of the
Domestic Security Program
The details of laws themselves can be found in many
other sources. The three bills dealing with immigrants came first. The Naturalization Act, passing 18
June 1798, lengthened the period needed for citizenship (and full political rights) from five to fourteen years. The Alien Act and Alien Enemies Act,
passing 25 June and 6 July respectively, gave the
president sweeping powers to summarily imprison or
deport suspicious aliens. The first Alien Act was perhaps the most appalling of the whole package. Even
in peacetime, the law allowed the president to eject
any alien he judged “dangerous to the peace and
safety of the United States” or had “reasonable
grounds to suspect are concerned in any treasonable
or secret machinations against the government
thereof.” No trial or evidence was required, and the
alien’s only recourse was to apply to the president for
a license allowing him or her to stay. Getting a license
could require evidence showing and a bond guaranteeing “that no injury or danger to the United States
will arise from suffering such alien to reside therein.”
Fortunately, President Adams took a narrower view
of his powers than Congress did, and never issued an
order under the Alien Act.
The most infamous piece of the domestic security package came last. Although the transatlantic
radicals working in the Republican press were the
clear targets of the Alien Acts, the Sedition Act that
finally passed on 14 July 1798 was even more blatantly political. Clearly intended to minimize
Republican chances in the 1798 and 1800 elections
by shutting down their most effective form of campaigning, the law was set to expire at the end of
Adams’s term. It imposed penalties of up to $2,000
and two years in prison on anyone who should

“write, print, utter, publish, or shall cause or procure to be written, printed, uttered, or published . . . any false, scandalous and malicious writing or writings against the government of the
United States . . . with intent to defame the said
government . . . or the said President, or to bring
them . . . into contempt or disrepute; or to excite
against them the hatred of the good people of the
United States.” The Federalists were careful to
incorporate the most progressive legal standards
available into the law, following the position laid
down in the famous Zenger case from the colonial
period. No one would be barred from saying or
publishing anything before the fact; afterwards all
bets were off. “The freedom of the press and opinions was never understood to give the right of publishing falsehoods and slanders,” John Allen
explained, “nor of exciting sedition, insurrection,
and slaughter, with impunity.”
This was state-of-the-art free press theory, but
wholly inadequate for the functioning democracy
that was trying to emerge in the 1790s. Although
the Sedition Act was more lenient than similar laws
in Europe, it nonetheless criminalized almost any
criticism that might be made in protesting government policy or campaigning against an incumbent
officer. It opened editors of opposition newspapers
to court actions for almost any political essay or
comment they might print, even a report of a public meeting, whether they wrote it or not. The Sedition Act allowed defendants to exonerate themselves in court by proving their assertions were
true, but as Republican critics soon pointed out,
political interpretations and opinion were almost
impossible to conclusively prove or disprove. How
would a Republican defendant prove in court, for
instance, that John Adams was a man “without
patriotism or philosophy”?
In practice, few Sedition Act defendants had
much opportunity to try serious legal defenses
under the act. The federal and northern state
courts were dominated by Federalist judges, and
they conducted the proceedings in a bitterly partisan manner. Judges interrupted the defense attorneys and often disallowed evidence and witnesses
when defendants tried to prove their accusations
53

Alien and Sedition Acts

were true. Orations denouncing the Republicans
and warning about the dangers of unchecked political criticism were given from the bench, with
juries present.
Although falling a good deal short of a “reign of
terror,” as the Republicans called it, the Sedition
Act was vigorously enforced. Every major Republican newspaper was hit in some fashion, along with
many of the minor ones. Some twenty-five people
were arrested under the Sedition Act, and they and
other Republican journalists and speakers were
harassed in other ways as well, including boycotts,
beatings, private lawsuits, and in one case a contempt of Congress charge that forced editor
William Duane into hiding.
Secretary of State Timothy Pickering nominated
himself the “scourge of Jacobinism,” and began
implementing the laws even before they were
passed, forcing the deportation of John Daly Burk, a
United Irishmen turned New York Republican editor and playwright, as the law was being debated.
Pickering and others then began searching the
Republican press avidly for comments that could be
prosecuted. Another early target was Benjamin
Franklin Bache, founding editor of the Philadelphia
Aurora. The administration had earlier tried and
failed to convict Bache of treasonous dealings with
the French, but on 26 June 1798, federal judge
Richard Peters had him arrested on a common-law
charge of seditious libel, despite a Supreme Court
ruling just three months earlier that the federal
courts had no jurisdiction. Bache was forced to post
$4,000 bail, an enormous sum for those days, but
died of yellow fever before he could come to trial.
The first victim of the Sedition Act proper was
Republican congressman Matthew Lyon of Vermont, who was particularly hated for having spit on
a Federalist in retaliation for an insult and later
fought back with fire tongs when the spat-upon
gentleman tried to cane him on the House floor.
Lyon got a $1,000 fine and four months in a jail
kept by his worst enemy, all for reading a letter
against Federalist foreign policy during his campaign for reelection.
Similar or even harsher punishment was given to
ordinary citizens who spoke out. In Massachusetts,
54

a drifter and former sailor named David Brown, a
sort of village radical who gave speeches in taverns
and occasionally wrote pamphlets, committed the
awful crime of erecting a liberty pole with a political sign on it: “No stamp act, no sedition and no
alien acts, no land tax. Downfall to the tyrants of
America: peace and retirement to the President:
long live the Vice President and the minority”
(Smith, 260). Although he confessed and apologized, the penniless Brown was fined $450 by
Judge Samuel Chase and sentenced to eighteen
months in prison.
Despite its eager enforcement, the Sedition Act
must be judged a failure, even on its own terms.
Although the prosecutions forced a few newspapers to suspend their operations, the Republican
press more generally never missed a beat. The
effect was quite the opposite in fact, as the Republicans filled their newspapers with horrifying
accounts of their and others’ persecutions. Politically this was highly effective material that documented the Republican visions of the Federalists
as tyrants and closet monarchists in league with the
British. The refugee radicals were careful to point
out the similarities between Federalist repression
and the British government crackdown that had
forced so many of them into exile. At the same
time, the Sedition Act politicized many young
printers, often turning even neutral publishers into
active Republicans once it became clear that printing both political sides would not be tolerated by
the authorities. The ironic end result of the Sedition Act was more Republican newspapers, not
fewer, with seven or eight new journals a month
popping up as the election of 1800 approached.
This hydra effect actually reinforced the Federalists’ conviction that conspiracy was afoot, but if so
it was a conspiracy to which many of them had conceded defeat by 1800. By means of the expanding
Republican press, wrote one Federalist writer in
the Hartford Connecticut Courant, “people from
the highest to the lowest” achieved “a perfect
union of opinion” (Pasley, 188). Two of those opinions were that the Federalist crusade against
Jacobin conspirators had to end, especially once
the “Quasi-War” with France died in 1800, and

American Indian Movement

that a different set of leaders needed to be given
command of the national government. Both of
those things came to pass when Thomas Jefferson
defeated John Adams in the presidential election,
and took office 4 March 1801.
Jeffrey L. Pasley
See also: Democratic-Republican Societies; Genet,
Citizen Edmond Charles; Hamilton, Alexander;
Jefferson, Thomas; XYZ Affair; Zenger, John Peter.
References
Addison, Alexander. 1798. Liberty of Speech and
Press: A Charge to the Grand Juries of the
County Courts of the Fifth Circuit of the State of
Pennsylvania. Washington, PA: John Colerick, for
the Author.
———. 1800. Reports of Cases in the County
Courts of the Fifth Circuit, and in the High Court
of Errors and Appeals, of the State of
Pennsylvania and Charges to the Grand Juries of
Those County Courts. Washington, PA: John
Colerick.
Carter, Edward C., II. 1970. “A ‘Wild Irishman’
under Every Federalist’s Bed: Naturalization in
Philadelphia, 1789–1906.” Pennsylvania Magazine
of History and Biography 94: 331–346.
Cobbett, William. 1994. Peter Porcupine in America:
Pamphlets on Republicanism and Revolution.
Edited by David A. Wilson. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Durey, Michael. 1997. Transatlantic Radicals and
the Early American Republic. Lawrence:
University Press of Kansas.
Elkins, Stanley, and Eric McKitrick. 1993. The Age
of Federalism. New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Hamilton, Alexander. 2001. Writings. Edited by
Joanne B. Freeman. New York: Library of America.
Hofstadter, Richard. 1969. The Idea of a Party
System: The Rise of Legitimate Opposition in the
United States, 1780–1840. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Jefferson, Thomas. 1984. Writings. Edited by
Merrill D. Peterson. New York: Library of
America.
Levy, Leonard W. 1985. Emergence of a Free Press.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Miller, John C. 1951. Crisis in Freedom: The Alien
and Sedition Acts. Boston: Little, Brown and
Company, Atlantic Monthly Press.
Pasley, Jeffrey L. 2001. “The Tyranny of Printers”:
Newspaper Politics in the Early American

Republic. Charlottesville: University Press of
Virginia.
Rosenberg, Norman L. 1984. “Alexander Addison
and the Pennsylvania Origins of Federalist First
Amendment Thought.” Pennsylvania Magazine of
History and Biography 108: 399–417.
Rosenberg, Norman L. 1986. Protecting the Best
Men: An Interpretive History of the Law of Libel.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Smith, James Morton. 1956. Freedom’s Fetters: The
Alien and Sedition Laws and American Civil
Liberties. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
United States Congress. 1834–1856. The Debates
and Proceedings in the Congress of the United
States. Washington, DC: Gales and Seaton.
http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/amlaw/lwac.html.
Websites
Texts of Alien and Sedition Acts: http://www.
ourdocuments.gov/content.php?page=document&
doc=16.

American Indian Movement
The American Indian Movement (AIM) was a radical political organization established in Minneapolis, Minnesota, in 1968 by Native Americans. From
1968 through the early 1970s, the AIM was
involved in numerous protests against the U.S. government, which were met with some general public support but severe government repression. The
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), along with
other federal agencies, labeled the AIM a subversive, possibly Communist, and likely terrorist
organization, and often dealt with the AIM, and as
a consequence the general American Indian community, in ways that breached civil and human
rights. They justified their actions by accusing the
AIM of conspiring against the government and
challenging the democratic nature of U.S. society
with radical militancy. To this day, the AIM has
some justification in seeing the federal government
as conspiring to break apart traditional Indian communities, appropriate their land, and make politically active American Indians the target of government and judicial repression. The AIM continues
to be a significant American Indian political organization, but the principal period of alleged conspiracies, activism, and repression took place between
55

American Indian Movement

Wounded Knee, South Dakota. Armed Indians sit back to back supporting one another and watching in all directions as
members and supporters of the American Indian Movement (AIM) hold this small village. (Bettmann/Corbis)

1972 and 1976: during this time the domestic
counterintelligence activities of the Nixon administration, coupled with increasing militancy by AIM
activists, resulted in violent confrontations, most
notably at Pine Ridge Reservation in South
Dakota.
The AIM was initially formed in the urban context of Minneapolis in a response to police brutality, and modeled itself on other radical militant
movements of the later 1960s, most notably the
Black Panthers. AIM chapters were rapidly established in other city centers and the AIM organized
and participated in numerous protests, the first
major protest being the occupation of Alcatraz
Island in 1969. In 1972, the AIM organized the
“Trail of Broken Treaties,” a protest in which many
American Indians traveled to Washington, D.C.,
and occupied the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA)
building. The building was vandalized and many
56

documents pertaining to American Indians taken.
By this stage, the government was very suspicious
of the AIM and its role in Indian protest. There
were numerous FBI reports that labeled the AIM
as a potentially seditious and insurrectionary
organization (Castile, 118). By early 1973, actions
to suppress the AIM were being put in motion and
the movement was being labeled as “extremist”
(Matthiessen, 55).
In 1973 Richard Wilson was elected to the leadership of the tribal government, with the support of
the federal government. In June 1973, the AIM
arrived at Wounded Knee on the Pine Ridge Reservation, at the request of those who protested his
leadership. An armed confrontation began between
the AIM and Wilson and his supporters, who were
known as GOONs (Gunfighters of the Oglala
Nation) and were young, armed Indian men backed
by the federal government. The siege continued for

American Indian Movement

seventy-one days. After the siege ended, many AIM
activists were indicted in a judicial attempt to destroy
the movement; few convictions were secured.
Meanwhile the Wilson government remained in
place and GOONs terrorized many on the reservation. In 1974, Wilson was reelected as tribal president under somewhat dubious circumstances. The
AIM continued its protest and set up an encampment in the reservation, which was subsequently
attacked by GOONs and federal forces. One AIM
activist was killed, as were two FBI agents—Jack
Coler and Ronald Williams. Activists Bob Robideau,
Darelle (Dino) Butler, and Leonard Peltier were
charged with the murder of the two agents.
Robideau and Butler were acquitted, but Peltier,
tried separately, was found guilty and remains in
prison to this day, despite charges of perjured evidence and other dubious aspects of the prosecution’s
case) (Matthiessen; Churchill and Vander Wall).
The death in 1976 of a young Native American
woman, Anna Mae Aquash, was also controversial.
She was found murdered in an execution style and
the FBI undertook an investigation, but forensic
procedures were questionable. The FBI accused
the AIM of the murder, as there were rumors
within the AIM that Aquash had infiltrated the
organization for the FBI. While the truth remains
unclear, the AIM has pointed to FBI involvement
in the murder.
Historians and writers remain divided on several
issues: to what extent can the AIM’s militancy be
justified, given the improvements in American
Indian affairs initiated by the federal administrations of the period? To what extent was domestic
counterintelligence willing to bend the rules and
undertake illegal activities in their desire to break
AIM? Was government activity prompted by greed
over obtaining land for uranium and coal mining
purposes?
Clearly, the government perceived the AIM as a
threat. FBI memos dating from 1976 claimed the
AIM was training for guerrilla warfare and was
planning to blow up BIA buildings in South Dakota
and to kill the state governor (Wyler, 198). Much of
the government’s activity was motivated by a determination to break the AIM apart, even if it meant

acting illegally, and was felt to be justified by these
alleged plots by the AIM. That government and big
business had an interest in the resources on American Indian land is also clear. The Wilson Pine
Ridge government was amenable to this interest
and willing to sell land rights. It was therefore
essential to the federal government to keep Wilson
in place, and this motivation played a part in its
activities at Pine Ridge. While it is also true that
the federal administrations of Johnson and Nixon
made significant progress in helping American
Indians and allowing some self-determination
(Castile), militancy was not tolerated nor, it seems,
was American Indian self-government that did not
fall in line with federal interests.
The militancy of the AIM, and even the behavior of the GOONs, must be placed within the context of the conditions of American Indians at the
time. Urban Indians had undergone massive social
and cultural dislocation, as well as some detribalization, in being moved into cities, and it was from
this context that the AIM emerged. Reservations
were economically and socially depressed areas,
with the GOONs made up of unemployed, angry
young men. Divisions also ran deep between traditionalists and young radicals like the AIM. It was
easy for the government to exploit such problems,
which it did in the case of Pine Ridge. Mistrust
between the federal government and American
Indians, which had existed for decades, fed beliefs
in conspiracies on both sides, and resulted in violence. While many of the facts remain uncertain, it
is probably true to say that the federal government,
rather than overcoming its fears of militancy and
seeing the American Indian Movement as a genuine political organization borne of real social
problems (caused largely by the federal government), instead encouraged a view of the AIM as a
conspiratorial and seditious movement in order to
protect its own interests. That the AIM saw the
government as conspiring not only to attack it but
also to destroy American Indian communities is
perhaps not surprising.
Amanda Laugesen
See also: Native Americans.

57

American Protective Association

References
Castile, George Pierre. 1998. To Show Heart: Native
American Self-Determination and Federal Indian
Policy, 1960–1975. Tucson: University of Arizona
Press.
Churchill, Ward, and Jim Vander Wall. 1988. Agents
of Repression: The FBI’s Secret Wars against the
Black Panther Party and the American Indian
Movement. Boston, MA: South End Press.
Matthiessen, Peter. 1992. In the Spirit of Crazy
Horse. London: Harvill.
Smith, Paul Chaat. 1996. Like a Hurricane: The
Indian Movement from Alcatraz to Wounded
Knee. New York: New Press.
Wyler, Rex. 1982. Blood of the Land: The
Government and Corporate War against the
American Indian Movement. New York: Everest
House Publishers.

American Protective Association
The American Protective Association (APA) was the
largest anti-Catholic organization in the United
States during the late 1880s and 1890s. The organization was founded as a secret order in Clinton,
Iowa, on 13 March 1887, by Henry Francis Bowers.
Its goal was to fight the perceived threat posed by
Roman Catholicism in the United States, a threat
that was often couched in conspiratorial terms.
Bowers was a lawyer who had been elected to a
number of county offices as a Republican. He also
was a Mason, a member of the Blue Lodge, and a
member of the thirty-second degree of the Scottish
Rite. The incident that led to the creation of the
APA was a local election in which a Protestant candidate believed he was defeated by the Catholic
vote. The Bowers group met the Sunday after that
election.
One of the central principles of the APA was support of the separation of church and state. The
organization’s members were particularly concerned about Catholicism infiltrating public
schools. The APA’s message proved popular. Soon
after its founding, the organization grew, with chapters spreading through the Midwest. By 1891, there
were branches in Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, and Wisconsin. The APA had 70,000 members in twenty states
58

in 1893. Increased immigration and an economic
panic led to additional growth so that by 1896, the
organization’s peak year, it claimed 2.5 million
members, spread across every state. Membership
declined after the presidential election of 1896.
Most of the members of the APA were Republicans and, thus, Republican candidates had to give the
organization serious consideration. In early 1896, the
group attacked William McKinley, a potential
Republican candidate for president. McKinley
became a target because he failed to meet with
members of the APA and to explain how he planned
to implement their demands if he were elected.
According to the organization’s platform officeholders were not to appoint Catholics to any position. In
spite of the support provided to McKinley when he
ran for governor of Ohio in 1893, the APA spread
rumors that he was a member of the Roman Catholic
Church, that he took advice from the Catholic bishop
of Columbus, and that he had two children in a convent. McKinley was elected president despite the
rumors. The APA suffered internal disputes over
endorsing McKinley and the organization began losing members because of the dissension.
Membership of the APA involved secret rituals.
New members were required to swear a number of
oaths while blindfolded. These oaths included
promises not to employ a Catholic worker if a
Protestant was available and not to go on strike with
Catholics. The blindfold was then removed because
the member had left “mental darkness,” and he took
a final vow. This vow included a denunciation of
Roman Catholicism and the pope, and a pledge to
protect the order and its members. The secret oath
became public in an exposé published in the St. Paul
(Minnesota) Globe in 1893. The U.S. Congress also
proposed to investigate the APA after a former congressman, Henry M. Youmans of Michigan, claimed
that his opponent in the 1892 election was a member of the organization. According to Youmans,
membership in the APA invalidated his opponent’s
candidacy for Congress.
To build public support for their cause, members
of the APA spread propaganda about Catholic goals
for America. A pastoral letter, allegedly written by
U.S. Catholic bishops, advocated the creation of a

American Revolution

Catholic political party and suggested that education
and true faith were not compatible. A forged papal
encyclical entitled “Instructions to Catholics” called
on Catholics to take over the U.S. government
because Protestants had forfeited all right to the
country. According to the encyclical, the Catholic
uprising was to take place “on or about the feast of
Ignatius Loyola [31 July] in the year of our Lord,
1893,” or on the date of the convening of the
Catholic Congress at the Chicago World’s Fair, 5
September. In the course of the uprising, Catholics
were to exterminate all heretics (i.e., non-Catholics)
found in the United States.
The American Protective Association became
largely moribund by 1900. The organization did not
completely disappear until 1911 with the death of its
founder and leader, Henry Bowers. Throughout its
existence, no record exists of violence against
Catholics by members of the APA, but the group
was effective in making many Americans fearful of
the Catholic Church. Although the APA ceased to
exist, anti-Catholicism continued in the United
States through the early decades of the 1900s.
John David Rausch, Jr.
See also: Anti-Catholicism.
Reference
Kinzer, Donald L. 1964. An Episode in AntiCatholicism: The American Protective
Association. Seattle: University of Washington
Press.

American Revolution
The conviction that the English colonial policies of
the 1760s and 1770s constituted a conspiracy to
enslave America played a major role in the outbreak of the American Revolution.
American Conspiracy Theories
Beginning around 1763, a series of political conflicts between England and its American colonies
prompted American critics to protest in conspiracy-minded rhetoric. The call in 1763 of some
Anglican leaders to install a bishop in America was
met in Massachusetts with angry protests that this
amounted to an ecclesiastical conspiracy to destroy

Thomas Hutchinson was the colonial governor of
Massachusetts at the outbreak of the American
Revolution. Between 1765 and 1774, he came to
symbolize those loyal to Britain in Massachusetts. (Circer,
Hayward, ed., Dictionary of American Portraits, 1967)

religious freedom. Two years later, the Stamp Act
of 1765 shocked and baffled many colonists. The
measure called for a stamp tax on all paper used for
purposes ranging from wills to playing cards, without consultation of or ratification by the colonial
assemblies. While many colonists were still willing
to concede Parliament the right to raise money
from the colonies, the heavy-handed measure
trampled American traditions of self-government
and cherished concepts of representation and liberty. Already several critics charged that this could
only be an early step in a larger plan designed by
59

American Revolution

schemers within the English government in order
to destroy the rights of Englishmen in America.
Some even felt that the Stamp Act’s real goal was to
foment a rebellion in America, which would subsequently be crushed militarily and allow a despotic
government to be installed.
Even though the Stamp Act was repealed in
1766 as a result of colonial protests, the crisis was
soon continued by the passage of the Townshend
duties in 1767, which continued other forms of taxation. Colonial critics became more and more convinced that the successive crises were not the result
of a misunderstanding or a normal political conflict
over negotiable interests, but were deliberately
designed by a powerful group in the English government in order to bring America to its knees.
Their suspicions were furthered through the controversy surrounding John Wilkes, a radical
English opposition leader, whose election to Parliament was widely applauded in the American
colonies. However, Wilkes was imprisoned and repeatedly denied his seat in the House of Commons, while a riot of some of his followers was met
with gunfire that killed several. When troops stationed in Boston shot several protesters in the socalled Boston Massacre in 1770, colonial critics
drew a parallel and concluded that opposition
voices both in England and in the colonies were
being permanently silenced.
Things came to a head when, in reaction to the
Boston Tea Party of 1773, Parliament passed the
Coercive Acts in order to discipline Massachusetts.
These measures were widely called the Intolerable
Acts and interpreted as a deliberate effort to choke
the colonies economically, abolish the rule of law
and trial by jury, and prepare the American
colonies for direct despotic rule. By 1774 many
prominent and moderate colonial leaders including
Thomas Jefferson, George Washington, George
Mason, and John Dickinson, were convinced that
English policies were deliberately designed to end
political freedom in America. The Continental
Congress itself endorsed such an interpretation in
its 1774 Declaration of Rights and Grievances,
which vehemently protested against “such acts and
measures as have been adopted since the last war,
60

which demonstrate a system formed to enslave
America.” Shortly thereafter, the first shots of the
Revolutionary War were fired, and in 1776 the
American states declared their independence,
arguing that a “long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces
a design to reduce them to absolute despotism.”
Who were the alleged conspirators? John Adams
and Josiah Quincy identified Thomas Hutchinson,
the governor of Massachusetts as a focal point of
the conspiracy. Quincy even accused Hutchinson
of being the originator of all the measures against
America, but most conspiracy-minded critics felt
that colonial officials could at best be the pawns of
much more powerful figures in England. The person most often identified as the source of the troubles for both the colonies and England was John
Stuart, Earl of Bute, prime minister from 1762 to
1763, the former tutor of young George III, and
the alleged lover of the dowager Princess Augusta.
The conspiracy theory argued that Bute, even
though he had to leave office in 1763 under public
pressure, had used his influence on the king to
form a secret party that in reality controlled appointments to office as well as the general policy of
Great Britain; he had also used his power to get
even with his old enemy John Wilkes. Subjecting
the American colonies to despotic rule was only the
first step in doing the same thing in England.
English Conspiracy Theories
Such views were not limited to America. In
England, too, a number of prominent intellectuals
and politicians asked themselves why the country
was in such turmoil despite the fact that it had just
won the Seven Years’ War and faced no devastating
problems. Whether sympathetic to or contemptuous of the American colonies, these thinkers identified similar causes for the troubles. Horace Walpole subscribed to the Earl of Bute theory.
Edmund Burke, in his 1770 essay “Thoughts on the
Cause of the Present Discontents,” also argued
that a hidden faction, a “double cabinet,” pulled
the strings in Great Britain. William Pitt, the veteran politician and steadfast ally of the American
colonies, looked toward the intrigues of rich mer-

American Revolution

chants involved in the Asia trade for the source of
government corruption.
Of course, not all conspiracy theories in England
ran parallel to those in America. One very popular
explanation of the crisis vis-à-vis the American
colonies was that from at least 1760 onward, a
group of American conspirators had, for their own
profit and aggrandizement, purposefully orchestrated events with the treasonous goal of independence in mind. Proponents of this conspiracy theory included Francis Bernard, the governor of
Massachusetts from 1760 to 1769, as well as his
successor Thomas Hutchinson. In fact, this interpretation won the highest endorsement possible
from George III himself, who in 1775 informed
Parliament: “The authors and promoters of this
desperate conspiracy have in the conduct of it
derived great advantage from the difference of our
intentions and theirs. They meant only to amuse,
by vague expressions of attachment to the parent
state and the strongest protestations of loyalty to
me, whilst they were preparing for a general
revolt” (Bailyn, 153).
In late 1775, the king’s statement was probably
right: the colonies were headed almost inexorably
toward independence. But in the 1760s and the
early 1770s, attachment to the crown was still
strong in America. There was no premeditated
plan to bring about independence through a series
of escalating crises, as George III and others
charged. Likewise, there was no coherent plot to
abolish liberty in the American colonies. To be
sure, prime ministers from George Grenville
onward certainly wanted to set a precedent of taxation in the colonies. Most leading politicians were
either ignorant or contemptuous of traditions of
self-government in the colonies. The king and most
parliamentary leaders wanted to reorganize the
empire into a more coherent system, and thus had
no intention of returning to the era of salutary neglect. Nevertheless, the taxation and reform measures of the 1760s and 1770s had limited and specific purposes; they did not constitute a deliberate
design to destroy the rights of Englishmen. Rather,
the American Revolution can best be understood
as a series of conflicts and misunderstandings, dur-

ing which the political differences between
England and its colonies became ever clearer, and
the stakes ever higher, to the point where a fullscale revolution was the result.
Nevertheless, the ubiquity of conspiracy-minded
explanations for the American Revolution is startling, but explainable. Theories of political conspiracy were a staple of eighteenth-century British
political discourse, and preceded the American
Revolution. English radicals often charged that a
secret faction had formed a ministerial conspiracy
that worked toward the consolidation of power and
the subversion of traditional English liberties.
Much of the political theory of the Real Whig tradition in England was geared toward a general attitude of suspicion, lest liberty be destroyed by
designing men. In fact, most contemporary
observers expected conspiracy and corruption to
seep into any political system, even the revered
English constitution; only through constant vigilance could such decay be prevented or at least
delayed. At the same time, eighteenth-century philosophy was built on the premise that all effects
had specific and identifiable causes. In the case of
political effects, these causes were expected to lie
with individual intentions, not abstract social forces
or uncontrollable political dynamics. So if the
colonists perceived negative effects from English
policies, while at the same time Parliament
asserted that they had the empire’s best interest at
heart, the colonists interpreted this discrepancy as
the deliberate deception of a malevolent conspiracy. Conspiracy theorists on both sides simply
interpreted events in the political and intellectual
framework of their time.
Markus Hünemörder
See also: Boston Massacre; Boston Tea Party;
Coercive Acts; Quebec Act; Stamp Act.
References
Bailyn, Bernard. 1967. The Ideological Origins of
the American Revolution. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Wood, Gordon. 1982. “Conspiracy and the Paranoid
Style: Causality and Deceit in the Eighteenth
Century.” William and Mary Quarterly, 3d ser.,
39 (March): 401–441.

61

Anarchists

Anarchists
Anarchism is a philosophy of social change that
emerged as an international movement in the midnineteenth century and saw its heyday in the early
twentieth century. The anarchist movement as a
whole advocated the eradication of the state and
believed that individuals would capably provide
their own order. The state, with its centralized
mechanisms of control (whether socialist or democratic), was seen as inevitably coercive. In the
United States the anarchist movement was interpreted as a leftist conspiracy to use aggression to
eradicate law and order. Labor union strikes, a
series of assassinations of European monarchs carried out by anarchists, and the Bolshevik Revolution accelerated fears that the movement intended
to induce worldwide uprisings and chaos. Within
the movement, anarchists of various ideological
persuasions promoted diverse methods of carrying
out revolutionary activity. They supported actions
ranging from peaceful protest, publications, and
delivering speeches, to violence.
The philosophy gained appeal in the United
States through opposition to the ills of industrialization. Many anarchists expressed concern over
issues such as wage slavery, the suffering experienced by recent immigrants, war and conscription,
and a perceived trampling of individual rights.
Anarchist figureheads sought especially to disseminate their message among the U.S. working
classes. This activity was largely perceived by certain power structures—trusts, police, and government—as a threat to democracy in the United
States. Anarchism was increasingly seen as a monolithic leftist conspiracy: all anarchists were potential bomb throwers or assassins, and the ideology
was interchangeably lumped together with communism and socialism. Although many anarchists,
specifically anarcho-communists, adopted some
Communist and socialist principles, anarchist values in many ways clashed with these ideas (particularly the idea of the state as purveyor of social and
economic organization).
In the wake of the Haymarket affair of 1886,
anarchists in the United States were popularly por-

62

trayed as terrorists (Woodcock, 464). In his analysis
of the anarchist movement published after the
trial, Michael Schaack, captain of the Chicago
Police, argued that: “Let none mistake either the
purpose or the devotion of these fanatics, nor their
growing strength. This is methodic—not a haphazard conspiracy. The ferment in Russia is controlled
by the same heads and the same hands as the activity in Chicago. There is a cold-blooded, calculating
purpose behind this revolt, manipulating every part
of it, the world over, to a common and ruinous end”
(Schaack, 688). The men executed in connection
with the Haymarket bombing had no direct
involvement with the incident, and became martyrs for U.S. anarchists, inspiring many important
people in the movement’s history to become
actively involved. Emma Goldman, for example,
was arguably the most famous and influential anarchist figure in twentieth-century America (Avrich,
165).
Many U.S. anarchists were immigrants and suffered prejudicial treatment as a result. This was
particularly evident during the “red scare” of
1919–1920, when anarchists were deported under
the 1918 Immigration Act (Morton, 98). It was also
in this sociopolitical climate that Italian American
anarchists Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti
were tried and executed for murder in a controversial and, many believed, unfair trial.
Fears of an anarchist conspiracy were justifiable
in some respects. Anarchists openly preached revolution through anarchist newspapers, books, lectures, and through affiliations with labor groups
such as the Industrial Workers of the World
(IWW). Johann Most advocated attentat—“propaganda-by-the-deed”—and published instructions
for making bombs, encouraging their use to spark
revolt (Trautmann). Alexander Berkman, an influential figure in the movement, attempted to assassinate Henry Clay Frick because of Frick’s handling of the Homestead Strike of 1892, during
which Carnegie steel mill workers were shot. A
drifter who claimed that he was an anarchist assassinated popular president William McKinley in
1901. However, violent deeds were carried out

Anti-Catholicism

independently and caused controversy even within
the anarchist movement among those who advocated violence as a justifiable means of bringing
about the revolution, and those who denounced
violent acts as unjustifiable under any circumstances. Emma Goldman expressed sympathy for
both McKinley’s assassin and Berkman, publicly
acknowledging their actions as desperate responses
to an oppressive system (Morton, 34–35). Following McKinley’s assassination, foreign anarchists
were legally prohibited from entering the United
States (Woodcock, 464–465).
Most scholars (e.g., Woodcock) agree that the
classical period of anarchism as a vital social movement ended by the 1930s due to the movement’s
failure to bring about revolutionary change and its
lack of a clearly defined vision of the form society
should take. Although anarchism is no longer
involved in, for example, large-scale labor disputes,
modern interpretations of anarchism persist in
social activist groups of various persuasions. However, anarchists are no longer popularly perceived
as a viable threat to democracy in post–cold war
America.
Tania Boster
See also: Anticommunism; Haymarket Bombing;
Industrial Workers of the World; Red Scare; Red
Summer of 1919; Sacco and Vanzetti.
References
Avrich, Paul. 1988. Anarchist Portraits. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Berkman, Alexander. 1970. Prison Memoirs of an
Anarchist. New York: Schocken Books.
Goldman, Emma. 1970. Living My Life. New York:
DaCapo Press.
Morton, Marian J. 1992. Emma Goldman and the
American Left: “Nowhere at Home.” New York:
Twayne Publishers.
Schaack, Michael J. [1889] 1977. Anarchy and
Anarchists. Reprint, New York: Arno Press.
Trautmann, Frederic. 1980. The Voice of Terror: A
Biography of Johann Most. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press.
Woodcock, George. 1962. Anarchism: A History of
Libertarian Ideas and Movements. Cleveland,
OH: The World Publishing Company.

Anti-Catholicism
Anti-Catholicism constituted one of the nation’s
earliest and most virulent conspiratorial fears. It
continues to linger in the very heart of U.S. popular culture, appearing in radio, television, music,
and now on the Internet. Based in the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries on Rome’s supposed
political power, antipathy toward Roman Catholicism has since the 1960s insisted that Catholicism
threatens the most basic tenet of U.S. identity: the
personal freedom of the individual.
Roman Catholicism represents the perpetual
“Other” whose very mysteriousness and difference
maintains a certain distance from U.S. life. Over
the centuries this distance has exhibited a rather
protean nature to where “anti-Catholicism” serves
as a canvas on which non-Catholic Americans paint
their hostilities. During the colonial period, antiCatholicism continued on U.S. soil religious and
political conflicts that began in Europe. During the
antebellum period, anti-Catholicism represented
the epitome of mental and physical slavery that
social reform movements sought to undo, much
like their crusades for temperance and slavery abolition. Catholicism’s ready identity with different
ethnic groups—Irish and German at first, then
Italians, Poles, and French-Canadians after the
Civil War—underlined the Church’s inherent foreign character. During World War I Catholicism
appeared to many Americans as a traitorous community in their midst. Only with John Kennedy’s
successful presidential campaign in 1960 did antiCatholicism shift to more individual concerns.
Now Catholicism is viewed as the last religious tradition capable of inhibiting the personal growth
and self-awareness of many Americans.
According to this view, Catholics, despite whatever claims they might make about their Americanness, harbor a hidden agenda that they seek to
impose on all other Americans. Historian Arthur
Schlesinger, Sr., once remarked that anti-Catholicism was “the only remaining acceptable prejudice.” Schlesinger pointed his comment toward the
nation’s educated elite, but the point could be
extended much further. The idea that Roman

63

Anti-Catholic pamphlet. (MSU Libraries Digital and Multimedia Center, Special Collections Division)

64

Anti-Catholicism

Catholicism represents a threat to U.S. culture has
taken many forms, including a few by Catholics
themselves. Mistrust and fear of Catholicism’s hierarchical structures and theological positions continue to animate U.S. life.
Roots in Protestantism and
English Puritanism
Animosity toward Roman Catholicism is deeply
rooted in the history of western Europe as well as
that of Christian thought. The apocalyptic imagery
of the “Whore of Babylon” in the Book of Revelation points toward the city of Rome itself. While
early Christianity read Revelation as a coded text
against pagan Rome, the generations that followed
often understood the Scriptures as leveling divine
judgment against Christian Rome as well. Rome’s
spiritual tyranny over Christians enjoyed demonic,
not heavenly, support. English Puritanism took the
argument even further. Seeking to purify the
Church of England of anything remotely Catholic,
anti-Roman animosity became a measure of one’s
faith. In other words, resistance to Roman Catholicism constituted a bedrock duty of all real English
Christians. The martyrdom of English Protestants
during the reign of Queen Mary (reigned
1553–1558) foretold the future if Catholics
achieved power. Elizabethan Puritanism held that
Catholicism constituted a threat to English politics
as well as the nation’s spiritual climate. The Spanish Armada, the Gunpowder Plot, and later the
Jacobite uprisings indicated that Catholics seeking
the throne also sought to return England, through
force if necessary, to Rome.
Colonial Expressions
The English colonies in the New World reflected
these conflicts with Catholic powers. Consequently, many colonies possessed legislation that
limited worship opportunities and sometimes voting rights for Catholics. Some, such as Massachusetts, threatened death by hanging to anyone
revealed as a Catholic priest, and even though
Maryland was founded as a haven for Catholics, it
quickly came under Anglican control, too. English
Protestant colonists felt surrounded by Catholic

colonial powers France and Spain. They therefore
sought to ensure that their own spaces were utterly
free of any Catholic contagion.
Fear of the Immigrant in the
Nineteenth Century
The disease metaphor became quite popular during
the nineteenth century, for Roman Catholicism
appeared as metastasizing tumor. Waves of immigrants from Germany and Ireland beginning in the
1820s accelerated the growth of the Catholic
Church. While internally the Church faced growing
ethnic conflicts (e.g., German parishes occasionally
refused the English-speaking Irish priest assigned
them by an Irish bishop), non-Catholic Americans
perceived Roman Catholicism as a foreign monolith
poised to overthrow the young nation’s democratic
system. It seemed that Catholicism was assuredly
un-American. The Church lacked democratic procedures for acknowledging authority, its worship
practices seemed clearly at odds with scriptural
guidelines, it had attempted the forcible reconversion of Protestants, and its members in the United
States were almost entirely nonnative immigrants.
Consequently, anti-Catholics acquired the label
“nativists” for their insistence that the foreign-born
could not claim to be Americans. Since the Catholic
hierarchy often established parishes with specific
national identities (e.g., naming parishes after a
nation’s patron saint, such as St. Patrick), Catholicism seemed to prevent its members from “Americanizing” completely. The Americanization issue
continued to pester Catholic leaders through the
nineteenth century. After the Civil War, immigration shifted from western Europe to southern and
eastern Europe. Catholics from these regions—
Italians, Portugese, Poles, Slavs, and French-Canadians from Quebec—appeared to be even more
resistant to Americanization than the Germans and
Irish.
Beyond the immigration issues, Catholicism
posed a significant question to U.S. identity. If the
nation became filled primarily with Christians
belonging to a foreign faith (since the pope,
ensconced at Rome, controlled Catholicism), what
would become of U.S. institutions like democracy,
65

Anti-Catholicism

free enterprise, and freedom of worship? The
nativist response took two paths: political opposition and popular culture. Both paths took inspiration from the Puritan slogan “No Popery.”
The Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, better
known as the “Know-Nothing” Party because when
asked about their political activities they claimed to
“know nothing,” sought to elect candidates to local,
state, and national offices who would ensure that the
United States remained a Protestant and democratic
country. In 1852 Know-Nothings won election victories nationwide, especially in Massachusetts where
the governor and all higher commonwealth officials
were affiliated. Know-Nothings diluted some of
their political power by joining larger national parties such as the Republicans. Similarly, social
reformers interested in abolishing southern slavery
and the liquor trade often regarded Catholicism as
the epitome of enslavement, suscribing to the view
that being Catholic subjected one to physical as well
as spiritual slavery. Many Catholics, it was felt, particularly the Irish, seemed unable to turn away from
liquor’s appeal. Reforming U.S. life began, therefore, with opposition to the further growth of
Roman Catholicism. Another battleground was the
public school system. In the early 1840s, following
the complaints of Catholic parents, New York
Protestants joined forces to ensure that public
schools continued teaching with the King James
Version of the Bible.
The mysteriousness of Catholic convent life fostered one of the strongest anti-Catholic messages.
Tales of “escaped nuns,” young women claiming that
they had been abducted into convent life, proved
wildly popular throughout the nation. Some were
published, the most popular of which was The Awful
Disclosures of Maria Monk, a fictitious account of a
young woman’s abduction into a Montreal convent.
Many “escaped nun” tales featured the sexual
depravity and rigid secrecy of the Catholic male
clergy. Not only did Catholicism threaten the
nation’s political economy, individual Americans
stood in danger of being the victim of Catholic
“press-gangs” hell-bent on increasing the Church’s
membership. In the 1840s a lecture circuit featuring

66

Monk and other escaped nuns, as well as theatrical
plays, developed the theme.
As a result, the arrival of Catholic immigrants
occasionally resulted in violence. Lyman Beecher’s
1835 “Plea for the West,” a speech in which he
claimed Catholics were settling western lands far
faster than Protestants and thus threatened to cut
off U.S. expansion, resulted in a mob burning an
Ursuline convent in Charlestown, Massachusetts.
In 1844 Philadelphia nativists rioted following
rumors that local Catholic parishes were stockpiling weapons for possible rebellious activity. Thirteen people died and over fifty were wounded in
the violence. Violence threatened in St. Louis and
New York, but did not materialize. The Civil War
offered a respite from anti-Catholic attitudes, as
Catholics served in both armies (notably Union
general Philip Sheridan) and religious sisters
served in medical roles. Even then northern
nativists questioned Catholic loyalty when, in 1863,
large numbers of Irish immigrants participated in
violent draft riots in New York City.
Political cartoonist Thomas Nash captured the
anti-Catholic message in an 1871 Harper’s Weekly
drawing. It depicted Catholic bishops as aggressive
alligators coming ashore to attack Protestant America, suggesting that Tammany Hall was a new Vatican and that Irish immigrant politicians threatened
to dismantle public schools. During the 1880s and
1890s, the American Protective Association (APA)
resurrected the Know-Nothing cause. Predominantly located in the Midwest, the APA utilized the
same rhetoric but failed to generate the same interest. It did succeed in casting suspicion on emerging
labor unions, often filled with and led by Catholics,
and other radical political movements. In the 1880s
and 1890s nativist politicians, particularly within
the Republican Party, sought to curtail immigration
to limit increasing Catholic power in urban areas.
Scientific racism informed these efforts, “proving”
that Anglo-Saxons—who were overwhelmingly
Protestant—enjoyed biological as well as cultural
and religious superiority over the newer Catholic
immigrants. Immigration restriction continued to
be an issue until Congress established strict limits,

Anti-Catholicism

aimed primarily at immigrants from Catholic and
Jewish areas of eastern and southern Europe, in
the Johnson-Reed Act of 1924.
The Ku Klux Klan in the 1920s
The Ku Klux Klan reemerged in 1915 as the primary vehicle for anti-Catholic nativism. By the
early 1920s, the Klan had become popular across
the nation. Committed to “100 percent Americanism,” the Klan sought to limit the powers of the
now well-established Catholic community. Klan
recruiters pursued Protestant clergy, and the Klan
moved to reinforce its view of traditional U.S.
morality. This included supporting Prohibition,
segregation, Protestant-oriented public schools,
strikebusting, and boycotting Catholic (and Jewish)
businesses. Significantly, this incarnation of the
Klan saw the largest membership numbers, and the
1920s Klan enjoyed national, not merely southern,
popularity. Klan voters helped elect sympathetic
politicians and passed anti-Catholic measures in
Maine, Indiana, and Oregon, as well as other states.
Klansmen fought with Catholic groups in workingclass urban neighborhoods in Ohio, New Jersey,
and Illinois. The Klan resurrected stories of “captured nuns” like Maria Monk. It also circulated a
fictitious oath—much like Protocols of the Elders of
Zion—purportedly taken by the Knights of Columbus wherein they pledged to murder Protestant
babies and undermine the Protestant political
establishment. However, the Klan’s popularity
quickly shrank after scandals emerged concerning
Klan leadership, especially Indiana’s grand dragon,
David C. Stephenson. The Klan enjoyed a minirevival during the 1928 presidential election, stirring up opposition to the Democratic candidate,
New York’s Catholic and anti-Prohibition governor,
Alfred E. Smith.
Contemporary Expressions
With the 1925 Scopes trial in Tennessee, evangelical Protestantism shrank away from public scrutiny,
thus silencing an important source of anti-Catholic
rhetoric. Evangelical opposition to Catholicism
remains to this day, but never incites the same level

of popular support. The Second Vatican Council
(1962–1965), which inaugurated landmark changes
in Catholic liturgy and theology (especially concerning non-Catholics), indicated the Church’s new
willingness to converse with, instead of repressing,
other religious perspectives. The Catholic Church
also expressed its appreciation of democratic political processes.
In this new situation, those advocating antiCatholic views, ironically, have often spoken from
liberal, not conservative, perspectives. Paul Blanshard’s wildly popular Catholic Power and American
Democracy (published in 1948) expressed the point
quite clearly: Catholics voted according to clerical
direction, instead of individual decision, and this
threatened U.S. democratic institutions. Through
utterly democratic processes, the Catholic Church
could mobilize its members to limit the religious and
political freedoms of other Americans. Although he
had studied to be a Congregational minister, Blanshard affiliated himself more closely with secular
humanist groups. He believed his argument was
nonsectarian since it applied to the political freedoms of all Americans. Blanshard’s work received
praise from mainstream newspapers as well as from
leading academics, such as John Dewey. This
recalled the antebellum social reformers who feared
Catholicism’s social and political influences, not its
theological foundations.
Blanshard’s legacy resurfaced in the 1970s and
1980s when Vatican authorities silenced American
Catholic academics such as moral theologian
Charles Curran. Catholic threats to personal freedom, especially concerning sexuality, have been
explored in U.S. popular culture, ranging from the
videos of the singer Madonna to television shows
such as Ally McBeal. Much like Blanshard’s earlier
work, these receive far less criticism from Protestants than from Catholics. The latest expressions of
anti-Catholicism use widely accessible language
and assumptions to question the Church’s (and
individual Catholics’) views on abortion, sexuality,
and personal freedom. The hysterical fears of
Maria Monk might have faded, but there remains a
sense that Catholicism, much like Nash’s cartoon,

67

Anticommunism

threatens to overwhelm freedoms and values that
non-Catholic Americans hold dear.
Jeffrey Marlett
See also: American Protective Association;
Coughlin, Father Charles; Know-Nothings; Ku Klux
Klan; Nativism.
References
Billington, Ray. 1938. The Protestant Crusade,
1800–1860: A Study in the Origins of American
Nativism. New York: Rinehart and Company, Inc.
Franchot, Jenny. 1994. Roads to Rome: Catholicism
in the Antebellum Protestant Imagination.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Higham, John. 1955. Strangers in the Land: Patterns
of American Nativism, 1860–1925. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Massa, Mark, S. J. 2001. “The New and Old AntiCatholicism and the Analogical Imagination.”
Theological Studies 62: 549–571.
McGreevy, John. 1997. “Thinking on One’s Own:
Catholicism in the American Intellectual
Imagination, 1928–1965.” Journal of American
History 84: 97–131.
Moore, R. Laurence. 1986. Religious Outsiders and
the Making of Americans. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Anticommunism
If cold war foreign policy manifested itself in
mutual hostility between East and West, the
nuclear arms race, and a commitment to methods
of covert subversion, its prosecution at home was
based on the premise of aggressive anticommunism. Although not a new phenomenon, the identification and systematic elimination of the U.S.
Left reached its peak of judicial action and social
acceptance during the 1940s and 1950s. The rise to
prominence of several key figures, including Senator Joseph McCarthy and President Harry Truman,
future President Richard Nixon, and J. Edgar
Hoover, coincided with a postwar political and
social climate in which extreme forms of radicalism—preeminently left-wing radicalism—were
deemed unacceptable. More than that, as a series
of high-profile legal proceedings made clear, the
combined forces of domestic leftism were widely
alleged to be antithetical to, if not in league against,
68

the American way of life. After the peak of anticommunist militancy in the mid-1950s, there followed a period when the campaign was forced to
move underground and to deploy covert strategies
of subversion that ironically paralleled the conspiratorial tactics of the Communists whose destruction they sought.
From “Red Scare” to the “Red Decade”
If the threat of communism was greatly exaggerated by its adversaries, it was certainly not wholly
falsified. In large part, the problem derived from
the Communist Party (CPUSA)’s characteristically
conspiratorial methods of organization and operation, and its apparent total reliance on the Soviet
Union in matters of policy and practice. The movement was explicitly structured according to Lenin’s
valued principles of hierarchy, secrecy, and total
commitment to the cause. Communist initiates or
“cadres,” many of them drawn from the immigrant
working class, were expected to spend long hours
studying the central texts of Marxism and organizing profile- and fund-raising activities for the party.
Moreover, as recent revelations from the Soviet
archives and files of the top-secret Venona Project
have confirmed, the CPUSA was, from its inception, led by a top echelon of men and women who
pledged allegiance to the leadership of the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia. Many of these figures
sought in Soviet communism a model of discipline
and radicalism with which to energize and coordinate the diverse struggles of labor unions and
organizations like the Industrial Workers of the
World (IWW) against the dominant power of U.S.
capitalism. When the CPUSA finally emerged out
of bitter factional conflict in 1919, it was with both
the political and financial backing of the Kremlin.
With this support, however, came the understanding that, regardless of more pressing local concerns, the party would unwaveringly toe the line
arrived at by the Soviet-led Communist International (Comintern).
It was also this traditional connection to the
Soviet Union that would place the party in the
greatest danger during periods of fervent anticommunism. In the early 1920s, for instance, with most

Anticommunism

of Europe still reeling from World War I, and with
Bolshevik anticapitalist rhetoric and labor unrest at
their most incendiary, membership of the CPUSA
was considered by many in the U.S. legal and political establishment to be in itself an act of sedition.
Capitalizing on their tendency toward conservatism and countersubversion, J. Edgar Hoover,
then an aspiring Justice Department official, found
powerful allies in the industrial, commercial, and
law-enforcement communities with whom he
launched a vicious counterattack against the radicals and striking workers. One long-term result of
the so-called red scare was the creation of a network of prominent anticommunists whose experience and expertise would prove vital during the
much broader assault on the U.S. Left during the
postwar years.
Before these powers could prevail, however,
there followed a period of relative success for the
domestic Communist movement. As the nucleus of
a huge “popular front” against European fascism
throughout the 1930s, the CPUSA presided over a
period that soon came to be known as the “red
decade.” From the Depression years until the era
of social restitution brought about by President
Roosevelt’s New Deal policies, the Communist-led
U.S. Left defined the political agenda, campaigning for everything from workers’ rights to the protection of young blacks against the scourge of
lynching in the South. Crucially important was the
Soviet Union’s resistance to the forces of fascism
personified in the figures of Hitler, Mussolini, and
General Franco in Spain, and the international
antifascist coalition coordinated by the Comintern.
Involvement in the Spanish Civil War provided
many U.S. leftists with the life-changing experience of radicalization. It should be stressed,
though, that support for traditionally leftist causes
was not limited to membership of the Communist
Party in this period. With a proactive, liberally
inclined president in the White House, the Left’s
popular agenda was matched by an administration
firmly committed to social equality and labor
reform, in stark contrast to the laissez-faire monopoly capitalism favored by successive governments
during the 1920s. While very far from a leftist him-

self, President Roosevelt surrounded himself with
an extensive and powerful fraternity of liberal and
left-inclined advisors, bureaucrats, and legislators—some of them “fellow-travelers” at the fringe
of the Communist Party’s orbit—who manned the
many administrative committees and working
groups that epitomized the New Deal era.
Throughout this period, for obvious reasons, the
conservative, anticommunist community remained
largely in the background of policy-formation.
The Conspiracy of Communism
If the anticommunist network was notable by its
absence during the prewar years, its roots had been
struck deep. In-fighting on the Left between supporters of Stalin and exiled Bolshevik leader Leon
Trotsky, together with the nonaggression pact
between Nazi Germany and Stalin’s Russia in 1939,
provided the perfect alibi for conservatives at
home to sign into law the Smith Act of 1940. By
making illegal any group that advocated the overthrow of the U.S. government, this legal instrument effectively outlawed the CPUSA and many of
its affiliates. Meanwhile, the international Left
movement suffered a series of external shocks that
would render it increasingly vulnerable to further
assault. Perhaps most important were revelations
from inside the Soviet Union of Stalin’s brutal
purges both of the Soviet high command and of
millions of ordinary Russians. The horror of such
stories, too shocking and numerous to ignore, combined with the dramatic volte-face of the NaziSoviet pact, led many Communists to desert the
party in the United States and worldwide. Thus, as
Maurice Isserman argues in Which Side Were You
On? (1982), the prewar Popular Front coalition
was already fragmenting and the CPUSA was
already a much-weakened force by the end of
World War II.
Central to the growth of anticommunism in the
1940s and 1950s were the changed realities signaled by the onset of the cold war. In these first few
years after the cessation of hostilities, many of the
constituent elements that would come to define
the cold war era were established, both at home
and abroad. The keynote of the period was struck
69

Anticommunism

in 1946 by Prime Minister Winston Churchill’s
“Iron Curtain” speech in which the British wartime
leader delineated a world divided between the
democratic West and the communist countries
dominated by Stalin’s autocratic rule. From this
point forward, it was clear that the Western powers’ new enemies would be the Soviet states to the
east, and that communism would now replace fascism as the principal ideological adversary of the
United States. Taking their cue from the mutual
hostility and brinkmanship that prevailed on the
international front, the newly resurgent anticommunist contingent set about eliminating the
domestic Left movement. The campaign was prosecuted with a violence and fervor that has led commentators such as playwright Arthur Miller to liken
the era to that of the witch-hunts in Salem, Massachusetts, during the late seventeenth century.
Much of the hysteria surrounding the persecution of U.S. Communists may be attributed to the
terms of engagement established early on in a series
of pivotal legal trials. Throughout the late 1940s,
many members of the preexisting anticommunist
network testified before the House Un-American
Activities Committee (HUAC)—itself created in
1938 to counter the threat of espionage during wartime—and other similar organs, to the seditious antiAmericanism of the CPUSA and to the treachery of
its members and affiliates. A list of the principal
actors in this drama, which captivated the public
imagination, reads like a “who’s who” of the heroes
and villains of the early cold war years: HUAC
members and prosecutors such as Senator Joseph
McCarthy, his chief counsel Roy Cohn, future President Richard Nixon, Senator Patrick McCarran,
FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, together with prominent former Communists and “friendly witnesses”
like Elizabeth Bentley, Louis Budenz, Whittaker
Chambers, Benjamin Mandel, and J. B. Matthews.
With the aim of “reveal[ing] the diabolic machinations of sinister figures engaged in un-American
activities” (Hoover, HUAC Testimony, 1947; in
Schrecker 1994), these men and women dominated
both the political agenda and the popular headlines
of the era. Their ascendancy, supported by many
sympathetic figures in the administrations of Presi70

dents Truman and Eisenhower (not least of all Truman himself), did more than simply destroy the U.S.
Left movement. Their accusations of widespread
Soviet penetration also had the effect of eroding
support for, and breaking the hegemony of, Roosevelt’s New Deal establishment.
The success of the anticommunist campaign on a
political and legal level was underscored by an
equally critical effort among conservative, liberal,
and reformed leftist academics, journalists, and
social scientists to provide the intellectual justification for the persecution of U.S. communists. To use
the title of a study by one such theorist, there was a
great desire in these years to identify and comprehend the “Appeals of Communism” so that selfappointed social engineers might then be able to
eliminate them from U.S. society (Almond el al.).
At the opposite extreme to these “scientific” or psychological interpretations were the writings of former party members like Whittaker Chambers and
Louis Budenz for whom communism was nothing
less than a secular faith locked in fatal struggle with
the forces of Western democracy and religion. For
both groups, however, the desired result tended to
be the same: the isolation of the Communist “virus”
from daily life and the immunization of society
against its future threat. This rhetoric of infection
was widely reflected in the popular culture of the
day, from the sensationalist tabloid and television
reporting of infamous trials like the Hiss-Chambers
case and the Rosenberg spy scandal, to the proliferation of movies like I Married a Communist (dir.
Jack Gross 1949) and I Was a Communist for the
FBI (dir. Gordon Douglass 1951), or science fictions such as Invaders from Mars (dir. William
Menzies 1953) and Night of the Living Dead (dir.
Don Siegel 1955), which dealt metaphorically with
the paranoia and hysteria of the witch-hunts. As one
historian has recently written, “most of the entertainment that reached the nation’s living rooms during the 1950s supported the status quo” (Schrecker
1998).
If the epithet “McCarthyism” has commonly been
used to characterize the era, then this is undoubtedly
because the Wisconsin senator was the single most
infamous and influential anticommunist crusader.

Anticommunism

For a brief period between 1950 and 1954,
McCarthy’s dogged investigation of leftist infiltration
within the government, labor unions, entertainment
industry, and military seemed to epitomize both the
specificity—it was McCarthy who first popularized
the wholesale naming of names and the use of
“blacklists”—and the ruthlessness of the campaign.
On the other hand, it is true that, by the spring of
1954, with the nation under the new government of
President Eisenhower, the mood had changed to
such an extent that McCarthy’s own methods came
under the spotlight of a Senate investigation. Nevertheless, in method and outlook, McCarthy most
closely resembled the witch-hunters of an earlier age
and so represented the clearest symptom of that
“psychosocial” disorder that important contemporary commentators like Daniel Bell, Arthur
Schlesinger, Jr., and Richard Hofstadter identified as
instrumental to the prosecution of the campaign.
For these critics, the rise of McCarthy and his fellow
zealots was, like earlier populist movements of both
right and left, sustained by the strong reactionary
tendency among the “unenlightened” moral majority
in U.S. society. It is now clear, however, that the campaign was more widespread than the epithet of
“McCarthyism” implies. Certainly, many more individuals were involved, and in a more partisan way
than was thought at the time, as recent studies of figures like Hoover, Nixon, and McCarran have proved.
In effect, the early 1950s saw the reappearance of an
already-strong, conservative anticommunist fraternity whose influence extended through all areas of
U.S. life, but which had been held in check during
Roosevelt’s New Deal. No less important was the
reformulation and retrenchment of liberalism after
World War II. In the works of prominent philosophers and political theorists like Schlesinger, J. K.
Galbraith, Reinhold Niebuhr, and Eleanor Roosevelt, and in the outlook and membership of powerful organizations and lobbying groups like the
Americans for Democratic Action (ADA), the American Committee for Cultural Freedom (ACCF), and
the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), the
outlines of a new concept of “consensus politics”
began to emerge. By its very nature, this form of cold
war liberalism tended to place extremism of both left

U.S. senator Joseph McCarthy earned the dubious
distinction of having his name become synonymous with
character assassination and guilt by association for
political gain. His unsubstantiated but politically popular
charges that the U.S. government was infiltrated with
communist agents during the early 1950s became known
as McCarthyism. (Library of Congress)

and right outside its purview and thereby to stigmatize both as equal threats to the status quo. Instead,
the proponents of consensus politics insisted on
shared assumptions of the ultimate wisdom of Western capitalism and the importance of “custom and
community sentiment” (Hyman).
Anticommunism after the 1950s
Toward the end of the 1950s, the anticommunist
coalition, like the Popular Front before it, began to
71

Anticommunism

fragment. This was undoubtedly due in part to
McCarthy’s ignominious fall from grace, but also to
the détente of the early Kennedy years, and the
emergence of a “new left” whose ideological trajectory was beginning to depart from the Marxism
of the Communist “Old Left.” Again, like the
movement it aimed to destroy, militant anticommunism did not disappear, however. Instead, it
changed form, sought new targets, and went
underground. As the New Left began to galvanize
around emotive causes like civil rights, solidarity
with Castro’s Cuba, and, in due course, opposition
to the war in Vietnam, so the forces of the Right
developed new methods of opposing their enemies. In the climate of superficial openness and
accountability fostered by the new, young Kennedy
administration, these methods were necessarily
secret. The techniques of covert surveillance and
subversion became the chosen modus operandi of
newly empowered strata within the existing anticommunist network. Hoover’s FBI and the CIA
were more powerful than ever, especially after
Nixon’s election to the presidency. Indeed, the
period from 1968 to 1974 saw an unprecedented
growth in covert countersubversion operations by
groups linked with one or other of the two agencies
that controlled intelligence, the vast majority of
them targeted at leftist groups at home and abroad
whose very presence allegedly posed a threat to the
stability of U.S. society. Such groups included the
governments of sovereign nations like Castro’s
Cuba, New Left organizations like the Fair Play for
Cuba Committee (FPCC) and the Students for a
Democratic Society (SDS), and off-shoots of the
civil rights movement like the Student Non-Violent
Coordinating Committee (SNCC), the Black Panther Party (BPP), and the Weather Underground,
many of which suffered not only the routine humiliation of McCarthyite court hearings, but also the
intervention of new branches of the anticommunist
network like the FBI’s Counterintelligence Program (COINTELPRO).
As certain conspiracy theorists such as Peter
Dale Scott argued at the time, the dramatic Watergate scandal of 1974 showed just how far the personnel and assumptions of the intelligence com72

munity, most of them derived from the early cold
war years, had penetrated the Nixon White House.
Thereafter, the strengthening of the Freedom of
Information Act and the work of investigative journalists and historians allowed for a critical reappraisal of the earlier period and of the conspiratorial actions of central figures like Hoover, Nixon,
and McCarthy. Nevertheless, this process of
reassessment could not prevent a return to the
dark days of the “high cold war” during the 1980s
when President Reagan’s confrontational foreign
policy and sanction of covert operations in Latin
America and elsewhere provided a sharp reminder
that many of the causes of anticommunist paranoia
remained active. Not since the immediate postwar
period, however, has domestic anticommunism
dominated the political and cultural agenda to the
exclusion of all else. As Richard Powers’s biography
of J. Edgar Hoover confirmed, the characteristic
approaches of many anticommunists in those crucial early years were often indistinguishable from
those of the Communist “conspiracy” they sought
to eliminate from U.S. life.
Dorian Hayes
See also: Alien and Sedition Acts; Atomic Secrets;
Central Intelligence Agency; Chambers, Whittaker;
COINTELPRO; Cold War; Federal Bureau of
Investigation; Hiss, Alger; Hollywood 10; Hoover, J.
Edgar; House Un-American Activities Committee;
Industrial Workers of the World; McCarthy, Joseph;
MK-ULTRA; Oswald, Lee Harvey; Red Scare;
Roosevelt, Franklin D.; Sacco and Vanzetti; Venona
Project.
References
Almond, Gabriel, et al. 1954. The Appeals of
Communism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Bell, Daniel, ed. 1955. The New American Right.
New York: Criterion.
Caute, David. 1978. The Great Fear: The AntiCommunist Purge under Truman and
Eisenhower. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Fried, Richard. 1990. Nightmare in Red: The
McCarthy Era in Perspective. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Griffith, Robert, and Athan Theoharris. 1974. The
Specter: Original Essays on the Cold War and the
Origins of McCarthyism. New York: Franklin
Harris.

Anti-Federalists

Hyman, Sidney. 1968. The Politics of Consensus.
New York: Random House.
Isserman, Maurice. 1982. Which Side Were You On?
The American Communist Party during the
Second World War. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan
University Press.
McAuliffe, Mary Sperling. 1978. Crisis on the Left:
Cold War Politics and American Liberals,
1947–1954. Amherst: University of Massachusetts
Press.
Miller, Arthur. 1972. The Crucible: Text and
Criticism. Edited by Gerald Weaks. New York:
Viking.
Powers, Richard Gid. 1987. Secrecy and Power: The
Life of J. Edgar Hoover. New York: Free Press.
Schrecker, Ellen. 1998. Many Are the Crimes:
McCarthyism in America. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
———, ed. 1994. The Age of McCarthyism: A Brief
History with Documents. Boston, MA: Bedford
Books.
Scott, Peter Dale. 1993. Crime and Cover-Up: The
CIA, the Mafia, and the Dallas-Watergate
Connection. New and rev. ed. Santa Barbara, CA:
Open Archive Press.
Summers, Anthony. 2000. The Arrogance of Power:
The Secret World of Richard Nixon. New York:
Viking.

Anti-Federalists
The United States was founded on conspiracy theories. Whiggish colonists started a revolution convinced that unscrupulous British ministers were
deliberately undermining traditional English liberties. With independence secured, liberty was again
threatened in 1787–1788, this time from within. An
urban, largely commercial group, known as the
Federalists, were conspiring to further their own
pecuniary interests and enforce domestic tranquility by creating a new constitution in secret session.
The Anti-Federalists, their opponents, used a common U.S. idiom—the conspiracy theory—to articulate their defense of decentralized government.
The Anti-Federalists were a loose collection of
usually small-scale farmers and paper-money advocates who were generally suspicious of financiers,
lawyers, merchants, and powerful landowners.
They were strongest in rural areas and in the
largest and most influential states: Massachusetts,

New York, Pennsylvania, and Virginia. It was from
those states that they drew their most able partisans: Sam Adams, James Warren, George Clinton,
George Mason, Samuel Bryan, Patrick Henry, and
Richard Henry Lee. There was no organized AntiFederalism in the way that the Constitution was
written in committee or that Alexander Hamilton,
James Madison, and John Jay co-wrote the Federalist Papers. Instead, they represented a common
American belief that what they called “consolidated government” (and modern Americans call
“big government”) followed the interests of the
elite at the expense of the common man.
Intellectual Context
Americans inherited several predominantly
English intellectual traditions that made conspiracy theories an intrinsic part of the rhetoric of early
American political discourse. The radical Whigs of
seventeenth- and eighteenth-century England suspected the crown and its advisers of perpetually
scheming to undermine English liberties. Moral
philosophy, a product of the Enlightenment that
sought to explain human interactions mechanistically, made humans directly responsible for all
events, no matter how complex. Any unpopular act
of Parliament or a provincial assembly, order of the
king, or action of a provincial governor, regardless
of how benignly or rationally conceived, could
therefore be attributed to sinister motives. Religion also contributed to the matrix. The dissenting
Protestantism of most colonists inculcated in many
a watchfulness of their religious liberties—liberties
that had been denied their fathers and brethren in
England and on the European continent. All these
made the colonists, as they put it, “jealous of”—
that is, protective of, suspiciously watchful for—
their liberties. In the greatest sustained debate in
U.S. history, Anti-Federalists drew heavily on this
intellectual heritage. They cited repeatedly the
French philosopher Baron de Montesquieu, who
insisted that republics could only be small. Anonymous Anti-Federalist essayists styled themselves
“Cato,” “Algernon Sydney,” or “Brutus,” who slew
the tyrannical Julius Caesar. Others wrote under
names glorifying ordinary Americans: “A Federal
73

Anti-Federalists

Farmer,” “A Countryman,” or “An Officer of the
Late Continental Army.”
Constitutional Conspiracy
The drafting and debating of the Constitution in
1787–1788 did little to convince the Anti-Federalists of the opposition’s virtues. Two New York delegates to the Constitutional Convention walked out,
protesting that the Convention would not revise
the Articles of Confederation as it was so summoned, but would create a new constitution. The
New York Anti-Federalist polemicist Cato complained that these now dubious proceedings had
taken place behind closed doors. Prominent AntiFederalists complained of a suddenly dismal mail
service. Newspaper editors, overwhelmingly Federalists, left Anti-Federalist editorials or rebuttals
on press-room floors or grossly misrepresented
opposition views. The prominent Pennsylvania
Gazette reported that Virginia Anti-Federalist and
Revolutionary War statesman Patrick Henry was
working for ratification. The Federalist NewHampshire Spy told a heavily Anti-Federalist state
that nary an opponent of the Constitution existed
in all of New England.
The questionable manner in which the Constitution was born and the misrepresentation of its support inevitably led some Americans to doubt the
beneficent motives of its authors. Anti-Federalists
often concluded that the Constitution had been
drafted to fashion a government run by the elite to
enslave the common folk. The “Federal Farmer” of
Pennsylvania saw in the Constitution a monarchy
waiting to happen because so many of the wealthy
were believed to be secretly attached to the principles of monarchy and aristocracy. George Mason of
Virginia, the most intelligent and respected of the
Anti-Federalists, predicted in a widely circulated
pamphlet that a government under the proposed
Constitution would waver between aristocracy and
monarchy, finally culminating in one or the other.
Anti-Federalist Objections
The source of Anti-Federal apprehension was the
fear of centralized authority. The new Constitution
seemed to many Anti-Federalists a throwback to its
74

colonial past with an unresponsive king, locally
irresponsible provincial governors, and an unrepresentative Parliament that taxed at will. The Federalists proposed a national constitution that would
supersede the individual state constitutions, which
hitherto had been the equals of the Articles of
Confederation. The implications of ending a truly
federal system seemed ominous. “Brutus” of New
York, the ablest of the Anti-Federalist theorists,
worried that under the “necessary and proper”
clause of Section 8, article 1 of the proposed Constitution, congress would possess absolute power
and consolidate all state governments into one
executive, legislature, and judiciary.
Nothing could prevent an aggrandizing national
government from destroying civil liberties. The
three branches of the proposed government would
invariably function as a de facto aristocracy and
monopolize power. Where Federalists saw checks
and balances, Anti-Federalists foresaw juntas
destroying public liberties. The executive, without
term limits, with appointment, pardon, and veto
powers, and in control of the military, would
become an unrestrained “President-General” in
league with the long-tenured Senate. Together, they
would make war and peace as they saw fit, usurping
national and state laws with international treaties.
The House of Representatives, the most democratic
feature of the new Constitution, was hardly representative enough for most Anti-Federalists, as only
the elite would serve here. And the Supreme Court,
appointed by the president and confirmed by the
Senate, would be composed of judges beholden to
their benefactors, interpreting laws and treaties
accordingly. As the Constitution said nothing about
preserving English common law, the courts would
no longer check legislative and executive excesses,
the “Federal Farmer” warned, but would now be
part of them. A small coterie of like-minded men
would make, interpret, and enforce the laws. Several Anti-Federalists remarked that so much power
had been granted to the rulers in the proposed Constitution that there was no need for the ambitious to
seize more. The Anti-Federalists also assumed that
republics could only exist on a small scale. It was a
lesson of history that republics must be near the

Anti-Masonic Party

people, where local interests were closely guarded
and local justice properly administered. Partly this
was a sectional issue. How could a Virginian determine the interests of a New Yorker? Would not the
more populous, urban, commercial North dominate
the new government and enact policies to the detriment of the agrarian, slave holding South? The
problem of a consolidated national government
making uniform immigration laws was obvious,
even among northern states. James Winthrop of
Massachusetts, writing under the pseudonym
Agrippa, found his state moral, pious, manly, and
prosperous because of its long-standing restrictions
on immigration. Impious and immoral Pennsylvania, conversely, had traded piety for prosperity by
allowing anyone to emigrate. A distant, unrepresentative government was hardly preferred over
provincialism.
Bill of Rights
Despite these serious protestations against the proposed Constitution, some Anti-Federalist fears
could be assuaged with a bill of rights guaranteeing
civil liberties and states’ rights. Here was the great
contribution of Anti-Federalist conspiracy concerns. Ever jealous to protect their rights and the
rights of state governments, they made it clear in
numerous essays, letters, and speeches that some
basic protection of the natural rights of citizens had
to be included in any constitution for it to be
accepted. Nothing in the proposed constitution
guaranteed, among other things, freedom of religion, the press, and arms; trial by jury; and the
reservation to the states of all unenumerated powers. Failure to include such provisions convinced
most Anti-Federalists that their counterparts were
conspiring to wreck democracy. In the end, the
Constitution was ratified because Federalists promised that the first Congress under the new plan
would take up the business of adding a bill of rights
to the new Constitution. Enough Anti-Federalists—
barely enough in key states like New York, Massachusetts, and Virginia—took them at their word.
The new Constitution was ratified by the necessary
nine of the thirteen state legislatures by July 1788.
The Bill of Rights—the first ten amendments, the

product of conspiratorial warnings—was added four
years later.
James Fisher
References
Jensen, Merrill, et al., eds. 1976–. Documentary
History of the Ratification of the Constitution. 18
vols. to date. Madison, WI: State Historical
Society of Wisconsin.
Kenyon, Cecelia M. 1955. “Men of Little Faith: The
Anti-Federalists on the Nature of Representative
Government.” William and Mary Quarterly. 3d
ser., 12: 3–43.
Main, Jackson Turner. 1961. The Anti-Federalists:
Critics of the Constitution, 1781–1788. Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Rakove, Jack N. 1996. Original Meanings: Politics
and Ideas in the Making of the Constitution. New
York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Rutland, Robert Allen. 1966. The Ordeal of the
Constitution: The Antifederalists and the
Ratification Struggle of 1787–1788. Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press.
Storing, Herbert J., ed. 1981. The Complete AntiFederalist. 7 vols. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.

Anti-Masonic Party
Following the American Revolution, some critics
began to voice their suspicions of Freemasonry as
a secret society, and these concerns eventually led
to the formation of the Anti-Masonic Party in the
late 1820s.
Modern Freemasonry began in 1717 in England
as a social organization built on the ancient traditions of the medieval masons’ guild. It developed
its own social hierarchy, with a complex system of
lodges, titles, and rituals, and within a few years it
began to spread abroad, coming to America by
1730. Over the next century, its aims of social
camaraderie and moral education attracted a
largely middle-class membership in America that
eventually numbered in the tens of thousands,
including such luminaries as Benjamin Franklin,
George Washington, and other political and military leaders of the day. However, in the later eighteenth century critics voiced concerns about its
overtly English origins, and its use of grandiose
75

Anti-Masonic Party

titles (which was said to smack of discredited European aristocracy). Especially suspect was its strict
code of secrecy, which was claimed to be enforced
by the threat of a brutal death and to be nothing
less than a cover for a foreign plot and moral
debauchery.
After the French Revolution, many Americans
became alarmed over the excesses of the new
French government and its seeming rejection of the
religious establishment, and paranoia over supposed
ties between Freemasonry and France superseded
earlier doubts about the society’s English origins. In
1798, the Reverend Jedidiah Morse, a conservative
Massachusetts pastor opposed to French ideas,
delivered a sermon that linked Freemasonry to the
evils of the French Revolution by way of a conspiracy theory that a secret society of Illuminated
Masons, or Illuminati, had been formed in Germany
to overthrow the institutions of government and
church, and that Freemasonry was a secret society
working to spread that subversion to the United
States. Since some members of his own congregation were Masons, Morse was careful to distinguish
between good and bad Masons, as did later antiMasons, but the idea that their fellow citizens were
part of a foreign plot proved hard to swallow for
most Americans. Although the clamor over the Illuminati conspiracy did not last long, it did serve as a
precursor to the more pronounced outbreak of antiMasonry yet to come.
The event that led directly to the creation of the
Anti-Masonic Party was the abduction and apparent murder in 1826 of Captain William Morgan of
Batavia, New York. Having announced his plans to
publish a book that would expose the secrets of
Freemasonry, Morgan was seized by parties
unknown and taken to Fort Niagara. From there
he disappeared forever, and the later discovery of a
body fed speculation that he had been murdered,
although the body could not be positively identified as his. When those suspected of foul play went
on trial, they were exonerated or given light sentences, inspiring a number of anti-Masonic groups
to conduct their own private inquiries. A conspiracy theory about Morgan’s demise was formulated
and widely distributed, including claims that
76

prominent Masons had abducted and murdered
him and, through their social and political influence, allowed the guilty parties to avoid punishment for the crime and induced the press to
remain silent about the true facts of the case. An
anti-Masonic social movement quickly sprang up,
first in New York and then in other northeastern
states, and attracted members especially from the
agricultural classes, who mistrusted the largely
middle-class Masons, and among church members
who saw Freemasonry as a rival to organized religion. The anti-Masons especially objected to the
secrecy practiced by Freemasonry, arguing that it
was incompatible with democratic principles and
served as a shield for the various illegal acts and
outrageous plots of which Masons were suspected.
Thus was born the first of a succession of nativist
movements that spread through the United States
in the nineteenth century, each with its own brand
of prejudice.
Having emerged as the first widespread social
movement in the history of the United States, antiMasonry transformed itself into the first of America’s third parties as it attracted support from those
who were politically opposed to President Andrew
Jackson, a Mason. Among the leading anti-Masons
in New York were Thurlow Weed, a journalist who
took over the editorship of the Anti-Masonic
Enquirer in 1829, and William Seward, who would
later become Abraham Lincoln’s secretary of state.
Anti-Masons started their own newspapers, organized local and state societies, and in 1832 ran their
own candidate, William Wirt, for president of the
United States against Andrew Jackson and Henry
Clay, also a prominent Mason. A former U.S. attorney general, Wirt doubted that Clay could win, and
hoped that his own candidacy would unite the
opponents of Jackson, but in the Electoral College
he succeeded in carrying only the state of Vermont,
where the anti-Masons established themselves as
the largest political party. A quarter of New Englanders voted anti-Masonic, but the poor national
showing of the anti-Masons in the election of 1832
led to their rapid deterioration as a movement.
Some of their younger leaders, Weed and Seward
among them, joined the new Whig Party and even-

Anti-Rent War

tually went on to become prominent members of
the Republican Party, where a moral fervor against
slavery substituted for their earlier antipathy to
Freemasonry. The anti-Masons provided a model,
flawed as it was, for those who would cast suspicion
on secret societies, and in the mysterious fate of
William Morgan they found inspiration for a complex conspiracy theory that could bear comparison
with those surrounding U.S. political assassinations
of the late twentieth century; but for all their
efforts, they did little to endanger the existence of
Freemasonry.
Larry Haapanen
See also: Freemasonry; Morgan, William; Morse,
Jedidiah.
References
Goodman, Paul. 1988. Towards a Christian
Republic: Antimasonry and the Great Transition
in New England, 1826–1836. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Lipson, Dorothy Ann. 1977. Freemasonry in
Federalist Connecticut. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Ratner, Lorman. 1969. Antimasonry: The Crusade
and the Party. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PrenticeHall.
Vaughn, William Preston. 1983. The Antimasonic
Party in the United States 1826–1843.Lexington:
University Press of Kentucky.

Anti-Rent War
Did the National Reform Association (NRA) and
the Whig Party conspire against wealthy landowners
in the 1840s to win votes from farmers along the
Hudson River, or did the tenants use these groups to
achieve their own goal of acquiring land? More
likely, the relationship was mutually beneficial.
The farmers had been protesting years before the
NRA and the Whigs began to help them. Economic
conditions following the panic of 1837, and the death
of the “Good Patroon” Stephen Van Rensselaer III
in 1839, led his sons, Stephen IV and William, to try
to collect $200,000 in overdue rents from the tenants on their father’s New York estates in eleven
counties, including Albany, Columbia, Delaware,
Greene, Rensselaer, and Schoharie. The farmers

refused to pay. They claimed that the land was not as
productive as it used to be and that the landlord
privileges were excessive. Since the price of wheat
had increased over the years, the requirement to pay
ten to fourteen bushels in addition to $40 to $65 per
farm was too much. They wanted to renegotiate the
leases or to purchase the land for $2.00 to $2.50 per
acre, to revoke the landlord’s water, mill, and mineral rights, and to have the landlord forgive back
rents for all tenants unable to borrow money.
Stephen agreed to surrender his quarter sales for
$30.00 per farm or for $2.00 per year, to give up his
mineral rights, and to sell his poorer quality land for
$5.00 per acre, if a tenant paid all back rent. This
angered the farmers, and on 4 July 1839, they
drafted a declaration of independence.
During the ensuing months, farmers intimidated
those who attempted to evict them. When Albany
County Under Sheriff Amos Adams failed to heed a
warning not to serve a writ on Isaac Hungerford,
someone destroyed the sheriff’s wagon and harness
and clipped his horses’ tails and manes. Crowds
forced other law officers to throw their writs of eviction into barrels of blazing tar, armed themselves
with sticks, and chased deputies away from their
farms. On 2 December, Sheriff Michael Artcher
gathered a citizen posse of 500, including former
New York Governor William Marcy and John Van
Buren, son of former President Martin Van Buren.
When they reached a hamlet at the foot of the
Helderberg Mountains, 1,600 men armed with
clubs threatened them and they retreated. The tenants deployed two Revolutionary War field pieces to
defend themselves. Governor William H. Seward
dispatched three uniformed companies of the state
militia, appealed to the tenants to put down their
arms, and pledged to take their grievances to the
state legislature. But the legislature took no action
other than suggesting that, perhaps, the state use its
power of eminent domain to force the landlords to
sell at a fair price. Further negotiations failed and
sheriffs continued their attempts to evict tenants.
In 1842 the NRA sent Thomas Devyr to help the
tenants form an Anti-Rent Association with the goal
of persuading the state to assist them. Organization
flourished and on 18 January 1844, 25,000 tenants
77

Anti-Rent War

The Anti-Rent War in New York State. Cartoon depicting an attack on the sheriff of Albany. (Bettmann/Corbis)

petitioned the legislature. A select committee of
Whig representatives from the affected counties
reported that the leases were onerous and repugnant,
that the system stifled agricultural incentive, and the
titles of the Patroons’ heirs were questionable. But
78

the Judiciary Committee concluded that the tenants
should purchase the land at the asking price.
The tenants intensified efforts to organize, this
time with an auxiliary secret army. Ten thousand disguised themselves as “Indians,” donning sheepskin

Antisemitism

masks and calico skirts and calling themselves to
arms with the sound of a tin horn. They tarred and
feathered deputies, intimidated tenants willing to
pay their rent, frightened the Patroon’s heirs, and
shot to death two persons who favored the rents.
The legislature passed an act to prevent persons
from appearing in public disguised and armed.
On 12 March 1844, Delaware County Under
Sheriff Osman N. Steele with 50 men defeated 100
“Indians” and arrested several who were convicted
and sent to prison. Agitation increased and on 7
August, when Steele attempted to sell the property
of Moses Earle to pay his back rent of $64, someone in the crowd fired shots, killing the sheriff.
This triggered a violent backlash against the antirenters and led Governor Silas Wright to proclaim
the county in a state of insurrection. Authorities
arrested 242 men, convicted 2 of murder and sentenced them to death, sentenced 4 to life in prison
and 13 to lesser terms, and fined 51. On 22
November, the governor commuted the death sentences to life in prison and asked the legislature to
tax incomes from rent and to limit the duration of
all future leases. The legislature passed the tax.
Then, in February 1847, newly elected Whig Governor John Young pardoned 18 anti-rent prisoners
and Stephen Van Rensselaer offered to sell some of
his land for $2 per acre.
When voters elected more anti-rent candidates
in 1848, the legislature directed Attorney General
Ambrose Jordon to test the Patroon’s title in court.
He filed eleven cases against Stephen, who lost in
lower court but won on appeal. Then, in 1852, the
court of appeals unanimously upheld a new case
declaring quarter sales illegal and void. Finally,
Stephen sold his west Albany lands in 1853 and his
East Manor in 1857.
Some incidents occurred even later. In 1860
William Witbeck shot and killed Deputy Sheriff
William Griggs when the latter attempted to evict
him for back rent. In 1865 “Indians” abused a man
who purchased a farm from a person who had been
evicted. And as late as 1866 a sheriff had to call for
reinforcements when seventy-five armed men
accosted him for attempting to evict a farmer.
JeDon A. Emenhiser

References
Bernard, Daniel Dewey. 1846. The “Anti-Rent”
Movement and Outbreak in New York. Albany,
NY: Weed and Parsons.
Emenhiser, JeDon A. 1962. “The Anti-Rent War.”
Armed Politics: An Analysis and Comparison of
Six Cases in the United States. Ph.D. diss.,
University of Minnesota.

Antisemitism
The concept of antisemitism refers to two distinct
kinds of prejudice and hostility against Jews. It
denotes both an essentially premodern hatred
against Judaism as a religion and a cultural community, and a more modern, racist and economic aversion to practically all of Jewish ethnicity or heritage.
Both types of antisemitism regard Jews as a uniform
group with inherent characteristics and predilections, whether they are derived from religion, from
historical-cultural development, or from the supposed racial essence of a people. The older type of
antisemitism formed a part of the worldview of several Western and Middle Eastern religions since
before the Common Era and was perpetuated
through patristic, medieval Catholic, and early
Protestant church doctrine. The latter type has proliferated with the elaboration of those modern
industrial, economic, and democratic structures
with which disproportionate numbers of Jewish people have been associated. In the United States both
generic forms of antisemitism have existed throughout the country’s history, marginal in numbers but
pervasive in the ethos of several extremist groups
and fluidly imbedded in mass popular culture. Both
forms of antisemitism have also yielded to various
conspiracy theories throughout U.S. history. This
has been the case especially in the period after the
1870s when several overarching conspiracist syntheses have been constructed and broadcast by antisemitic ideologues and publicists.
Christian Antisemitism in Colonial
and Antebellum America
In the colonial period of American history and in
the early Republic antisemitic prejudice rarely
resulted in full-blown conspiracy theory. Much of
79

Antisemitism

those periods’ public doctrine was, however,
underlain by a traditional Christian public theology
that incorporated a deeply ambivalent and frequently adversarial attitude toward Jews and
Judaism. These attitudes abided, were reformulated, and significantly contributed to the content
of later, more modern forms of antisemitic conspiracism. Among Christian motifs with powerful conspiracist resonance were the concepts of original
sin, of the Fall of Man, and the supposedly continual temporal struggle between forces of good and
evil, of Christ and of Antichrist. These motifs
tended to envisage this worldly existence as a space
characterized by human rebellion and hubris,
rooted in the Fall, and in a free will wrongly
employed, which amounted to a conspiracy against
a divinely set and ultimately triumphant order.
Given its supersessionary outlook (i.e., a belief that
the Christian religion had now rightfully replaced
or “superseded” Judaism), such a worldview not
surprisingly supported and became enmeshed with
antisemitism. Supersessionary beliefs were
grounded in antisemitism by early Christian writings, and later by Catholic canon law and early
Protestant texts, much of which tended to associate
postbiblical Jews and Judaism with satanic forces
and to imagine a Jewish desire to destroy Christians and Christianity. Such underlying, cosmic
conspiracy beliefs were particularly strong in the
Puritan Protestant forms of Christianity that were
prevalent in the United States of the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries. These tended to predict
a future apocalypse in which Christianity came to
take over the world from its supposed infidel or
Judaic grasp.
Given that for most of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries the majority of U.S. citizens identified with some form of Christian religion, the
nation was particularly predisposed for varied syntheses of religion, conspiracism, and antisemitism.
Although a strong pro-semitic strand also existed
from the beginning of the Christian experience in
the United States, many leading Protestant clergymen of the colonial and early republican periods
did proffer a public theology along antisemitic lines
conducive of conspiracism. Some of these clergy,
80

such as the colonial New England divines John
Winthrop and Cotton and Increase Mather,
denounced Jews as “the synagogue of the
Antichrist,” and accused them of supposedly using
magic and witchcraft in an anti-Christian, satanically inspired campaign. Others accused Jews,
Roman Catholics, Congregationalists, and Episcopalians of a joint conspiracy to foist an established,
apostate church on the United States. Also, popular myths dating back to the medieval age continued to circulate well into the nineteenth century
about Jewish anti-Christian practices such as the
poisoning of wells, the drinking of Christian blood,
and the desecration of the Holy Communion
wafers, as well as about Talmudic prayers for the
annihilation of all Christians. On occasion these
myths found expression through the idiom of conspiracy, but more often this so-called chimerical
antisemitism restrained itself to a more general and
unsystematic, politically unorganized prejudice.
For the most part, the conspiracies pointed out
were taken to be local and contextual on the one
hand, and universal but transcendental on the
other hand.
In eighteenth- and nineteenth-century America,
this kind of a religion-based conspiracist attitude
did not, however, tend to lend itself to political
conspiracy theory. As far as such theory existed, it
was more likely still to be directed against the
British, the French, and the Roman Catholics, or
against such secret societies as the Freemasons,
than against observant Jews. This was the case
especially with the conspiracist polemic that briefly
followed the French Revolution in 1789 and in
which some leading Protestant clergy for the first
time broached the so-called Illuminati conspiracy
theory, later to be suffused with antisemitism. In
what were the first theories ever constructed about
a universal, systematically led political conspiracy,
the Illuminati were taken to be the world conspiracist hub of Enlightenment philosophers, Freemasons, and of several occult anti-Christian secret
societies, and as such the organization primarily
responsible for the French Revolution and for all
subsequent subversionary and anti-Christian agitation. The major European theorists who con-

Antisemitism

structed that all-inclusive theory sometimes
claimed that Jews were to be found at the core of
its subversive apparatus and that Jews in particular
were the ones ultimately directing it. Some U.S.
conspiracy theorists alluded to such accusations,
first made in 1806, and they sometimes formed
part of the mostly anti-Catholic and anti-Masonic
agitation of the early- and mid-nineteenth-century
mass political movements, the Anti-Masonic Party
and the Know-Nothing (American) Party. However, such claims were not generally accepted at
the time, and also the French Revolution’s contemporary U.S. critics tended to regard its conspiratorial aspects as largely unconnected with Judaism
or Jewishness.
All in all, in the United States in the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries there rarely resulted antisemitic action comparable to that which was
endemic in contemporary European societies.
Although residual discrimination in office holding
and sometimes in voting and landowning rights
continued in some states into the nineteenth century, on the whole antisemitic prejudice in the
United States remained weak. Its conspiracist
aspects were weaker still, residing mostly in general and diffuse suppositions about a cosmic conspiracy by those refusing to accept Christianity.
Modern Political and
Economic Antisemitism
It was only with the arrival in the late nineteenth
century of two additional sets of influences—modern finance capitalism and modern racist theory—
that the materials were all in place for the emergence of a fully developed antisemitic conspiracy
theory. In its consistent, generic form this theory
came to accuse all Jews, as a group, of having colluded to take unfair advantage of the economic and
political power that, after late-nineteenth-century
Jewish emancipation, was for the first time formally available to them. Given that this generic
theory issued from secular, economic, and racist
speculations, the prescriptiveness for antisemitic
conspiracy theory of Christian attitudes would
seem to be open to question. Yet it remains equally
true that antecedent Christian prejudices had

already predisposed many in the Gentile world so
to configure all subsequent threats to traditional
religio-political valuations and structures that Jews
were accorded a central role.
In the United States and in Western Europe this
modern, economic, and racist form of antisemitism
emerged after about 1870. It was by that time that
most Western European Jews had achieved full
political emancipation and civil rights and had suddenly become socially and politically more prominent than ever. Jewish representation in the financial and commercial sectors was by that time
already disproportionate. According to so-called
interactionist models of antisemitism, this multiple
new conspicuousness of Jews called forth intensified European animosity toward them. The same
process was at work in the United States, even
though political emancipation had taken place
much earlier. For the late-nineteenth-century rise
of the Jews was patent in the United States as well,
partially because of the arrival of great numbers of
Eastern European Jewish immigrants and partially
because of Jewish prominence in the new class of
finance capitalists that emerged after the Civil War.
The unprecedentedly swift and pervasive period of
industrialization, urbanization, and economic centralization that also followed the Civil War generated new economic dislocations and anxieties just
as Jews became more prominent and seemed more
than others to benefit from the changes. For those
so minded, it proved irresistible not to trace that
conjunction to a secret financial cabal that was
malevolent, foreign, international, and Jewish.
From the early Republic onward some U.S. antisemites had voiced concerns over what they perceived as Jewish power in international finance and
commerce far in excess of what their numbers
should have indicated. Late-eighteenth-century
plans for the construction of an American Bank
had been denounced as a secular Jewish conspiracy, and similar charges had reemerged at regular
intervals throughout the nineteenth century. During the Civil War they had enjoyed a particular
revival, and the commander of the Union armies,
General Ulysses S. Grant, had at one point tried to
evict all Jews from areas under his control because
81

Antisemitism

of their purportedly disloyal commercial activities.
On the Confederate side similar, inverted charges
had been made against the Jewish secretary of state
Judah Benjamin and against others said to conspire
against the Confederacy and on behalf of international financiers and moneylenders. With the palpable rise of American-Jewish banking interests
that took place from the late nineteenth century
onward, these kinds of charges multiplied and
intensified manifold.
Most conspicuous in the discourse of various
left-wing populist and agricultural protest movements, such as the Populist Party, this new economic antisemitism issued in a variety of full-blown
conspiracy theories in the 1870s through the 1890s.
In these conspiracy theories all the perceived evils
of modern capitalism and industrialism were
ascribed to Jews, because of their supposed racial/
religious bent for exploitation and, on a more precise level, because of the purported machinations
of identifiable Jewish financiers. The latter type of
theories tended to center around the supposed
power of the Rothschild banking family and those
of its U.S. agents that were central in various reconstruction and public debt refinancing schemes after
the Civil War, as well as in an essentially imperialist
defense of their investments abroad. The economic
dislocations attendant on these schemes were
highly disruptive of traditional agrarian communities, and in the western and southern areas most
affected they tended to be blamed on a cabal of
Jewish financiers acting in collusion with corrupted
Gentile politicians. This strand of left-wing antisemitism reached something of a culmination in
the 1890s campaigns for the free coinage of silver
(and against imperialism) by the Democratic presidential candidate William J. Bryan. Affiliated
motifs could still be detected after World War I in
various anti-internationalist, isolationist, and social
reformatory forms of discourse.
On the political right, as well as elsewhere, these
conspiracist speculations were further focused by
the new racist, eugenicist, and social Darwinist theories, which made their appearance at about the
same time. No major race theorist emerged in the
United States, but a more generally orienting racist
82

paradigm came to characterize much of the intellectual discourse of the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. Both right-wing and left-wing
intellectuals traversed racist arguments, claiming
that some inherent, genetically acquired racial
imperative drove Jews toward a quest for world
domination and generally to reprehensible financial and commercial activities. Elitist literary antisemites further accused Jews of having a baneful,
corrupting influence on the aesthetic and moral
standards of U.S. life through their financial dealings and through the control that they allegedly
acquired in early-twentieth-century print media
and in the Hollywood film industry. These elitist
antisemites tended to regard both of these kinds of
supposedly Jewish influence as somehow racially
grounded and possibly conspiracist in nature; certainly international and pervasive.
A fusion of these right- and left-wing tracks of
racist antisemitism was never effected, but in the
United States no less than in Europe they separately
continued to color much of public discussion
throughout the twentieth century. On the whole, the
Left’s racist conspiracism tended to remain altogether more implied and unsystematic, directed
against international bankers in general, while the
right-wing version moved ever closer to structured
and highly ossified universal conspiracy theories.
Antisemitism and Twentieth-Century
Illuminati Theory
In the wake of World War I right-wing conspiracy
theorists revived and brought up to date the older
theories on the Illuminati. It was then that antisemitism was, for the first time, placed into the
very center of the Illuminati theory. Its full-blown
twentieth-century forms tended to be adaptations
from the writings of Nesta Webster, a British pioneer of the study of the Illuminati whose many
publications were widely circulated in the Englishspeaking world from 1918 onward. It was she,
more than any other, who framed the twentiethcentury interpretive matrix that made secular and
revolutionary Jews the controlling and directing
power behind the Illuminati. Claiming that the
originally Masonic organization had been taken

Antisemitism

over at some point by an inner cabal of influential
Jewish financiers, philosophers, and Reform rabbis, Webster and her conspiracist followers portrayed all, apparently unrelated forms of subversion as deliberately chosen, complementary tracks
of a core Jewish conspiracy.
This reformulation of the Illuminati theory
found favor primarily because of the need to
explain Russian Bolshevism, the apparent overrepresentation of Jews in it, and the purported interest
of international financiers to trade with the Bolsheviks and to have them recognized by the Western powers. The concurrent radicalization of Western labor movements and of colonial nationalists
provided further causes for concern for many on
the right, as did the creation of the League of
Nations as a new supranational authority invested
with a radical social program. This multiple coincidence could not readily be explained in traditional,
nonconspiracist ways, least of all by those already
steeped in Christian conspiracist thought-forms
and interested in continued adherence to traditional religio-political authorities. In the tumultuous aftermath of World War I, all of these developments were instead increasingly interpreted
from the Illuminati theory and pronounced different tracks in the campaign for world control of the
Illuminati’s core of Jewish financiers.
The 1920 republication of the so-called Protocols
of the Elders of Zion provided crucial added documentation for this new version of the Illuminati
theory. Protocols contained a relatively precise program of action that fitted in with earlier predictions
and could be presented by conspiracy theorists as
the exposed twentieth-century plan of Illuminati
action. Although the document was actually a forgery created by czarist secret police, the authenticity of the Protocols as a secret Jewish document
was vouched for by a wide range of apparently respectable commentators. Various abridgements
and commentaries of the Protocols quickly spread
in the United States. Especially influential among
them were those broadcast in the Dearborn Independent and the book The International Jew (1921)
by the industrialist Henry Ford. He became the
primary popular disseminator of Illuminati conspir-

acism in the United States and, more than anyone
else, was responsible for the unprecedented spread
and popular acceptance of the Jew-Bolshevik equation, which coincided with his period of greatest
antisemitic activity, the years 1920–1927. A range
of lesser known and less influential U.S. antisemites
further popularized the Jew-Bolshevik collusion
before and after Ford’s public recanting in 1927.
From the Catholic radio priest Father Coughlin to
the Silver Shirts of William D. Pelley and from the
Defenders of the Christian Faith of Gerald D. Winrod to Gerald L. K. Smith’s Christian Nationalist
Crusade, these populist antisemites benefited from
and used the anxieties of the Great Depression to
incorporate in 1920s generic conspiracy theory
such subsequent developments as the New Deal,
or “Jew Deal,” and the United Nations. More than
a hundred new antisemitic organizations were created in the 1930s, most of them rooted in this kind
of conspiracism.
In the 1930s and 1940s, speculations on the Illuminati also found their way to the exegesis of many
prominent Christian fundamentalist leaders. Especially important in this regard was William B. Riley,
the Baptist founder and head of the World Christian
Fundamentals Association, who commanded an
important position in Christian print and radio
media and in various fundamentalist organizations,
and could thus powerfully exert himself in the
spreading and popularizing of antisemitic attitudes.
Riley primed the early cold-war generation of fundamentalist leaders and made sure that Christian
fundamentalist theology accommodated secular Illuminati conspiracism within the older framework of
Christian prophecy thought. He, his disciples, and
others like him endorsed the Illuminati theory,
accepted Protocols as largely authentic, and accentuated the purported Jewishness of international communism. Believing in the imminence of the Second
Coming of Jesus Christ and in a preceding antiChristian world empire, these fundamentalists
tended also to portray the League of Nations and the
UN as prefigurations of the coming anti-Christian
world power and to oppose them as such. They further assumed that secular Jews, in particular, played
a central role in this anti-Christian world power and
83

Antisemitism

that it operated along the lines sketched out in the
Protocols.
Renditions of Illuminati theory thus shaped by
fundamentalism were used by many religious and
secular antisemites throughout the interwar and
cold-war periods. To them, it cohered the apparently unrelated, subversionary, and anti-Christian
movements of religious and cultural modernism,
international communism, liberal internationalism,
colonial nationalism, and, originally, Zionism. Each
was presented as but one track in the world conspiracy of secular Jews and their allies, each
designed in its different way to weaken the temporal power of Christianity, and each directed by an
immensely powerful inner cabal of conspirators.
Because of its malleable and inclusive nature, such
a compound conspiracy theory proved appealing to
many on the political and religious right, usable in
a range of anticommunist and antimodernist campaigns from the 1940s to the early 1990s.
By any gauge, antisemitism precipitously declined in the United States during the cold war.
The antisemitic aspects of anticommunist conspiracy theory tended to become ever more rarely
voiced and explicit, more and more silent and
implied. Yet behind much of the anticommunist
clamor of the cold war the old antisemitic prejudices still operated.
Post–Cold War Trends
No marked weakening of the various antisemitic
conspiracy theories was noticeable immediately
after the cold war, even though one of their main
rationales was removed by the implosion of the
Soviet Union and of international communism. Also,
the increasingly consensual aversion felt toward
antisemitism that the crimes of the Holocaust had
generated in Western societies made it increasingly
difficult for conspiracists to maintain the overtly
antisemitic complexion of their theory. Yet its
essence remained unchanged. Conspiracy theorists’
concerns were hardly alleviated by the ending of the
cold war, for they saw in it the collapse of only one
overt aspect of a still ongoing conspiracy. After the
cold war conspiracist discourse centered increasingly on international organizations, such as the UN,
84

the World Bank, and the International Monetary
Fund, which were now portrayed as the residual
aspects of the one single conspiracy of which international communism had been another aspect. The
supposedly Jewish character of that conspiracy’s
inner cabal was now referenced more through general allusions to international finance than through
direct naming, but the antisemitic element
remained at the core of the theory, as did, frequently, the Illuminati.
One new constituency for antisemitic conspiracism received much public attention from the
1980s onward, but its theories did not contain anything new. This was the antisemitism apparent in
the African American community, most glaringly in
the Nation of Islam movement. Its leaders, and
other prominent African American antisemites,
revisited all the customary religious, economic, and
racist conspiracy theories, but it was manifest that
the core motifs of antisemitic conspiracy theory
had remained remarkably uniform and unchanged
from their first appearance.
Throughout its long history in the United States,
antisemitism has yielded itself to conspiracism,
whether premised on antecedent religious prejudices or more interactionist prompters. Its religious and secular forms alike have tended to coalesce around a number of slightly different but
essentially homogeneous permutations of the socalled Illuminati conspiracy theory. This theory has
proved to be one of the most persistent containers
of antisemitism ever, not least because its malleable and all-inclusive nature can be used to
accommodate widely dissimilar forms of economic,
religious, racist, or political anxiety. For most
Americans, a general predisposition toward conspiracist explanations came from originally Christian forms of anti-Jewish prejudice, and the Illuminati theory was situated into this context as a
secularized form of millennialist speculation. Gradually, its appearance became emphatically anticommunist and anti-internationalist and its antisemitic roots increasingly obscured. However, there
was no doubt but that secular conspiracy belief,
especially when allied with prophecy belief, was a
mainstay of much of U.S. popular and extremist

Apocalypticism

thought well into the post–cold war era. Nor was
there much doubt that such conspiracism was
predicated on presuppositions and paradigms originally derived from religious and racist antisemitic
speculation.
Markku Ruotsila
See also: Barruel, Abbé; Illuminati; Protocols of the
Elders of Zion.
References
Dinnerstein, Leonard. 1994. Antisemitism in
America. New York: Oxford University Press.
Ginsberg, Benjamin. 1993. The Fatal Embrace: Jews
and the State. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Jaher, Frederic Cople. 1996. Scapegoat in the New
Wilderness: The Origins and Rise of AntiSemitism in America. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Lindemann, Albert S. 1997. Esau’s Tears: Modern
Antisemitism and the Rise of the Jews.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Ribuffo, Leo P. 1983. The Old Christian Right: The
Protestant Far Right from the Great Depression
to the Cold War. Philadelphia, PA: Temple
University Press.

Apocalypticism
Conspiracy theories are sometimes generated
through an apocalyptic worldview. An apocalypse is
an approaching significant transformation that will
mark a new phase of human experience. Those
anticipating the apocalypse can passively wait for
the event or actively promote its arrival. They can
dream of the dawning of the Age of Aquarius or
fear the nightmare of a terminal nuclear wasteland.
The terms “apocalypse,” “revelation,” and
“prophecy” share common root words related to
the uncovering of hidden truths—a core claim of
conspiracy theories. Apocalypticism is a major feature of Christianity, but the tradition has deep roots
in Zoroastrianism and Judaism and can be found in
Islam, Hinduism, and other religions. Today the
influence of the apocalyptic mindset has emerged
from these religious traditions and transmuted into
a dizzying array of secular beliefs.
Apocalyptic movements often anticipate the
betrayal of an idealized community by secret

malevolent forces conspiring against the common
good. Those persons sounding the warning urge
immediate and drastic measures to stop the secret
conspiracy from achieving its sinister goals.
Episodes of this type of apocalyptic conspiracism
appear periodically throughout U.S. history: witchhunts in Salem in the 1600s; fears of “alien” sedition
in the late 1700s; claims of plots by Freemasons or
Catholics in the 1800s; allegations of a Jewish banking cabal behind the Federal Reserve in the early
1900s; and the anticommunist witch-hunts of the
cold-war 1950s. Historian Richard Hofstadter studied U.S. anti-Masonic movements of the 1800s and
wrote of the “apocalyptic and absolutist framework”
of those warning of the claimed conspiracy (Hofstadter, 17). He developed the theory that conspiracy thinking in U.S. right-wing movements represented a “paranoid style” in U.S. politics. According
to Hofstadter, “the central preconception of the
paranoid style [is the belief in the] existence of a
vast, insidious, preternaturally effective international conspiratorial network designed to perpetrate acts of the most fiendish character” (Hofstadter, 14). He argued that grandiose conspiracy
theories were constructed when a conspiracist
channeled a sense of persecution and hostility into
apocalyptic claims that were overheated, overly suspicious, and overaggressive.
Damian Thompson looked at Hofstadter’s thesis
and concluded he was right to emphasize the “startling affinities between the paranoid style and
apocalyptic belief,” especially the demonization of
opponents and “the sense of time running out.”
But Thompson felt Hofstadter “stopped short of
making a more direct connection between the two.
He did not consider the possibility that the paranoia he identified actually derived from apocalyptic belief; that the people who spread scare stories
about Catholics, Masons, Illuminati and Communists” had been primed by the dramatic conspiracist narrative of the End Times popular among
Protestants in the United States. Thompson argued
that “the persistence of such belief in the United
States rather than Europe surely explains why the
paranoid style seems so quintessentially American”
(Thompson, 307–308).
85

Apocalypticism

In the 1950s academics postulated that those
who join dissident social movements (and sometimes circulate conspiracy theories) are psychologically unbalanced. Phrases such as “lunatic fringe,”
“extremists of the left and right,” and “wing nuts”
gained popular usage—especially to dismiss the
activism of the 1960s. This view is sometimes
called the classical or pluralist school, represented
by authors such as Daniel Bell and Seymour Martin Lipset. Critics of the classical school call it the
“centrist/extremist theory” because it glorifies an
idealized center and implicitly defends the status
quo, shielding the powerful from popular complaints. Hofstadter actually drew a distinction
between the psychological and the sociological in
his work, but for years the idea that paranoidsounding conspiracy theories were a sign of mental
illness reigned supreme as an influential concept,
especially in mainstream media.
Since the 1980s academic theories about social
movements have stressed their rational and strategic
nature, portraying dissidents as people seeking the
redress of grievances by collectively mobilizing
resources and exploiting political opportunities. All
dissident movements involve some form of apocalypticism with their narrative of speaking truth to power
and demands for a transformation of existing relationships that enforce dominance and oppression.
Investigative reporters are practicing a form of apocalypticism when they uncover criminal conspiracies
and malfeasance by political and business leaders.
Some analysts argue that when dissidents
develop the more spectacular and dubious conspiracy theories, it is a misdirected attempt to understand and challenge the actual power and privilege
of dominant groups (Fenster). This type of conspiracism is a narrative form of scapegoating where
the apocalyptic style is used to demonize targeted
groups as wholly evil, and to valorize as a hero the
person sounding the warning about the malevolent
plot (Berlet and Lyons, 9). There is increasing
attention to the apocalyptic style in the study of history, sociology, and political science; and it has a
long pedigree in studies of religion and literature.
As an applied way of seeing the world, however, it
is as old as the Bible.
86

Revelation
In Western culture, apocalypticism traces back to
the Book of Revelation, the last book in the New
Testament in the Bible. Revelation contains a
prophetic story of God’s wrath caused by the rising
tide of greed, sloth, lust, and sin in general. As a
warning, God orders the Four Horsemen of the
Apocalypse to spread wars, diseases, civil strife,
and natural disasters.
Satan seizes this time of chaos to send in the
Antichrist, who appears in human form as a popular world leader, promising peace through the
building of one worldwide government. His
accomplice, the False Prophet, urges all world religions to unite. A rumor is spread that the popular
world leader is actually the Second Coming of
Jesus Christ. Some Christians are fooled.
The real aim, however, is the total destruction of
Christianity. Once the evil Antichrist gains control
of the world through a conspiracy involving
betrayal by popular political and religious leaders,
the storm troopers of Satan start to track down true
Christians. When caught, the Christians not fooled
by the Antichrist are told they must accept the
mark of the beast—666—as proof they have
renounced their earlier beliefs. If they refuse, they
are rounded up, tortured, and murdered. God
eventually intervenes, and there is a huge battle on
the plains of Armageddon in the Middle East.
Good triumphs over evil, ushering in a millennium
of Christian rule.
Many Christians see the Book of Revelation in
metaphoric terms, but others read it as a Godgiven script in which they must play a role when
the time comes. While apocalyptic millennialism
based on the Book of Revelation is more prevalent
in Protestantism, it exists in Catholic subcultures as
well.
Christian Apocalyptic Millennialism
Most contemporary Protestant Christian fundamentalists are premillennialists, believing the Second Coming of Christ starts a thousand-year period
of Christian rule. Some Protestant fundamentalists
are postmillennialists who believe that godly Christian men must seize control of society and rule for

Apocalypticism

Albrecht Durer’s drawing depicting the Four Horsemen
of the Apocalypse, 1498. (Bettmann/Corbis)

one thousand years before Christ returns. The
most militant of these are the Christian Reconstructionists. The terms “millennialist” and “millenarian” are often used interchangeably to
describe social and political movements that are
apocalyptic and seek the ideal society. The concept
is used regularly in anthropology, where an early
and influential study looked at millenarian “Cargo
Cults” that emerged in the Pacific Islands in the
1940s and 1950s.
It is the demonizing version of apocalyptic Christian millennialism that has played a major role in
establishing conspiracism as a key frame of reference in European cultures—and later in the new
colonies of the Americas. The problem starts when
apocalyptic Christians in Europe started viewing
current world events as “signs of the End Times,”

and then scapegoated those with whom they disagreed as agents of the Antichrist. This dynamic
drew on the ancient tradition of dualism or
Manicheanism, in which the world is seen as a stage
for a struggle between absolute good and absolute
evil. The cast of players is composed of “Us” versus
“Them.” This divisive process is sometimes called
the creation of the apocalyptic “Other.”
For Christians, Jews were often cast in the role
of the “Other.” As early as the second century,
Christians portrayed Jews as in league with the
Antichrist. Twelfth-century Christians blamed Jews
for the ritual murder of children, poisoning of
wells, desecration of communion bread and wine,
and other heinous acts. During the Inquisitions
that followed in later centuries, the apocalyptic
scapegoating of Jews was often tied to a claim that
they were engaged in a vast evil conspiracy. This
process was repeated during the sixteenth century,
and can be found in the anti-Jewish writings of
Martin Luther, for whom the Reformation was a
necessary purifying prelude to what he saw as the
approaching End Times.
The conspiracist reading of Revelation became a
central apocalyptic narrative in the political discourse of Christians. The image that reverberated
down through the centuries was of a vast global
conspiracy involving high government officials
betraying the decent productive citizens, while
subversive parasitic agents gnawed away at society
from below.
Freemasons, Jews, and Communists
When the theories of the Enlightenment began to
popularize the notion of the separation of church
and state and the inherent rights of the individual,
those intellectuals who defended the unrestrained
prerogatives of church-state oligarchies were quick
to cast their critics in the role of subversive conspirators. In the 1790s John Robison and Abbé
Augustin Barruel claimed that the revolutionary
ideas of the Enlightenment—and the French Revolution—were part of a plot networked through
lodges of Freemasons. The alleged culprits were
the Illuminati, members of a philosophical study
group started by a Bavarian free-thinker named
87

Apocalypticism

Adam Weishaupt. Both Robison’s and Barruel’s
books are apocalyptic in a generic sense, but
excited readers quickly wove their themes into
vividly apocalyptic scenarios.
In the early 1900s, charges that the Freemasons
controlled the banks, the press, politics, and the
government were rewritten into an antisemitic
hoax document claiming a Jewish world conspiracy.
The Protocols of the Elders of Zion first appeared
in Russia as a creation of the czarist secret police,
and its most popular early version specifically
linked Jews to the conspiratorial machinations of
the Antichrist. The Protocols argues that behind
the Freemason conspiracy is an even more secret
conspiracy run by rabbis.
Implicit in both the anti-Masonic and antisemitic conspiracist narratives, as they were first
modified for U.S. consumption, is the theme that
the United States is essentially a Christian nation
threatened with subversion by anti-Christian secret
elites with allies in high places. The secular version
of U.S. conspiracism omits the overtly religious
references and simply looks for betrayal by political
and religious leaders. Conspiracist movements in
the United States derived their specific narratives
from these historic roots, ranging from mildly
generic to harshly antisemitic.
Godless communism was the central conspiracy
scapegoat for many conservative Christians in the
twentieth century. The rise of U.S. Protestant Fundamentalism in the early 1900s coincided with a
secular political attack on bolshevism and anarchism as un-American. Defense of democracy and
capitalism became interwoven. This buttressed
support for the Palmer Raids in late 1919 and
1920, during which socialist and anarchist labor
organizers were accused of plotting an apocalyptic
campaign of bombing and insurrection. Projecting
their apocalyptic fears into action, the government
launched a countersubversive campaign that
deported thousands of immigrants from Italy and
Russia based on the false perception that they were
all part of a conspiracy of criminal sedition.
Events such as the establishment of the Federal
Reserve System and the income tax were woven
into Christian apocalyptic conspiracism, and flour88

ished during the administration of President
Franklin D. Roosevelt. These were sometimes portrayed as part of the efforts of the Antichrist to
socialize and collectivize all societies under a oneworld government as prophesied in Revelation.
Christian evangelical tracts discussing the relationship between communism and the apocalyptic End
Times were popular from the 1920s through the
1960s. Different subcultures could easily weave in
claims that behind the evil of the “red menace”
were Freemasons, Jews, or both. Later it was the
UN, the Trilateral Commission, or other scapegoats.
Apocalypticism and Fundamentalism
Hal Lindsey reignited Protestant apocalyptic speculation in 1970 with his book The Late Great Planet
Earth, which sold 19 million copies. U.S. Protestant fundamentalists were the main audience for
this and the many apocalyptic books that followed.
The original use of the term “fundamentalism”
referred to a populist theological protest movement that arose within U.S. Protestantism in the
early twentieth century. Fundamentalism was a
reaction against mainline Protestant denominations
in the United States such as Presbyterians and Baptists and, to a lesser extent, Methodists, Episcopalians, and others. Leaders of these major denominations were accused of selling out the Protestant
faith by forging a compromise with the ideas of the
Enlightenment and modernism. In the early 1900s
conservative critics of this denominational leadership developed voluminous lists of what they considered the fundamental beliefs required for people to consider themselves Christian—thus the
term “fundamentalism.”
The term is now used to describe similar but not
identical religious renewal movements in other religious traditions, including Islam, Judaism, Hinduism, and Buddhism. Fundamentalism is often
confused with orthodoxy and traditionalism. Fundamentalists claim to be restoring the “true” religion by
returning to “traditional” beliefs and enforcing orthodoxy—the set of theological doctrines approved of as
sound and correct by a faith’s religious leaders. In
fact, while fundamentalist movements claim to be
restoring tradition and orthodoxy, they actually cre-

Apocalypticism

ate a new version of an existing religion based on a
mythic and romanticized past.
There is a basic apocalyptic framework common
across religious fundamentalist movements—the
idea that a struggle between good and evil is reaching a crucial moment in history. One way to mobilize
people to join a religious fundamentalist movement
is to claim that the idealized Godly society is being
subverted by an evil conspiracy. This raises the
stakes in the anticipated apocalyptic confrontation.
Fuller ties the Christian millennialist viewpoint
to the larger issues of demonization and scapegoating when he argues that “Many efforts to name the
Antichrist appear to be rooted in the psychological
need to project one’s ‘unacceptable’ tendencies
onto a demonic enemy. It is the Antichrist, not
oneself, who must be held responsible for wayward
desires. And with so many aspects of modern
American life potentially luring individuals into
nonbiblical thoughts or desires, it is no wonder that
many people believe that the Antichrist has camouflaged himself to better work his conspiracies
against the faithful” (Fuller, 168).
While many dissident movements (religious or
secular) are in some sense apocalyptic, not all such
movements utilize demonization and scapegoating
to construct conspiracy theories. Even those Christians who think the End Times are imminent do
not automatically succumb to conspiracism. There
is a deep division within modern Christianity
between those Christians who identify evil with
specific persons and groups such as Muslims, feminists, or homosexuals and those Christians who see
evil as the will to dominate and oppress. The distinction cuts across theological and political lines.
Some of the most vocal critics of apocalyptic demonization and conspiracist scapegoating come from
within Christianity, such as Gregory S. Camp or
Dale Aukerman.
Apocalyptic New World Order
When European communism began to collapse in
the late 1980s, many Christian conspiracists simply
shifted their attention to another godless philosophy—secular humanism. The attack on liberal secular humanism gave new life to fundamentalist

conspiracy theory. On the one hand, the secular
humanist conspiracy could be tied to the outward
manifestations of the Satanic End Times, while on
the other, a conservative critique of liberalism and
moral relativism that omitted overt references to
prophetic passages in Revelation could be crafted.
Apocalypticism remained central in both versions as a call for a return to “traditional” values as
the only way to stave off the impending collapse of
society. This came to be known as the Culture
Wars.
As the calendar year 2000 approached, scores of
books aimed at Christian evangelicals warned of the
coming apocalypse and many contained elaborate
conspiracy scenarios involving the Antichrist, the
Freemasons, the UN, computers, universal price
codes, and corporate globalization. Jeremiah Films
produces videos with conservative Christian apocalyptic theology emerging in the form of conspiracist
claims. The 1993 video The Crash—The Coming
Financial Collapse of America comes in two versions: one with a secular doomsday scenario and a
Christian version featuring Biblical prophesy. Jeremiah Films distributed several videos claiming vast
conspiracies by the Clinton administration, including allegations that the president had his aide Vince
Foster assassinated.
Preparing to survive the coming apocalypse is the
basis of the survivalist subculture that stores food
and conducts self-defense training. Conspiracism,
apocalypticism, and survivalism are a potent stew.
The tragic shootout between federal agents and the
Weaver family in Idaho in 1992 involved government misconduct and a failure to understand the
power of apocalyptic belief. The Weavers were survivalists because they were followers of Christian
Identity, a theology rejected by all mainstream
Christians that claims the United States is the
Promised Land and white Christians are God’s chosen people. The neo-Nazi version of Identity claims
Jews are Satanic agents, and sometimes followers
arm themselves for what they believe is an imminent
apocalyptic race war. The Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Texas, was a survivalist center,
and leader David Koresh was decoding Revelation
as an End Times script. The failure of government
89

Apocalypticism

officials to understand this dynamic resulted in
many needless deaths in 1993.
Spurred by anger over these events, the Patriot
movement developed an armed wing, known as citizen militias, which briefly flourished in the mid1990s. Patriot social movements involve as many as
5 million Americans who believe that the government is manipulated by subversive secret elites and
is planning to use law enforcement or military
force to repress political rights. The militias circulated an elaborate conspiracy theory about betrayal
by secret internationalist elites that is a standard
narrative of right-wing populist movements in the
United States. A popular speaker in these circles is
Robert K. Spear, author of Surviving Global Slavery: Living under the New World Order. Spear
believed the formation of armed Christian communities was necessary to avoid the mark of the beast
in the coming End Times.
The approach of the year 2000 seemed to stimulate apocalyptic excitement in a variety of groups.
The Aum Shinrikyo sect turned its apocalypticism
outward with a deadly 1995 Sarin gas attack on the
Tokyo subway. The Heaven’s Gate mass suicide in
1997 merged millennial apocalyptic visions from
the Bible, the prophecies of Nostradamus, and the
literary genre of science fiction. Also turning its
apocalypticism inward, between 1994 and 1997 the
Order of the Solar Temple staged group suicides in
Canada, France, and Switzerland. Other self-fulfilling apocalyptic events include the People’s Temple
suicide/murders engineered in 1978 by Jim Jones in
Guyana; and the Ugandan doomsday sect Movement for the Restoration of the Ten Commandments of God, where in the year 2000 some 1,000
devotees were murdered by the sects’ leaders.
Apocalypticism as a style can also be detected in
doomsday scenarios circulated by some sectors of
the environmental and antinuclear movements,
although they point out that nuclear devastation or
our atmosphere turning into toxic soup would
effectively mean the end of time for the species
that are aware of it. That would truly be apocalyptic, but no one would be left to appreciate the
irony.
Chip Berlet

90

See also: Anti-Masonic Party; Antisemitism; Aryan
Nations; Barruel, Abbé; Cold War; Federal Reserve
Bank; Freemasonry; Illuminati; Militias;
Millenarianism; Millerites; One-World Government;
Red Scare; Robison, John; United Nations;
Universal Price Codes; Waco.
References
Aukerman, Dale. 1993. Reckoning with Apocalypse.
New York: Crossroad.
Barruel, Abbé Augustin de. [1797–1798] 1995.
Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism.
2d ed., rev. Translated by Robert Clifford. Fraser,
MI: Real-View-Books.
Bell, Daniel. 1963. The Radical Right. The New
American Right. Rev. ed. Garden City, NY:
Doubleday.
Berlet, Chip, and Matthew N. Lyons. 2000. RightWing Populism in America: Too Close for
Comfort. New York: Guilford.
Camp, Gregory S. 1997. Selling Fear: Conspiracy
Theories and End-Times Paranoia. Grand Rapids,
MI: Baker Books.
Cohn, Norman. [1957] 1970. The Pursuit of the
Millennium. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fenster, Mark. 1999. Conspiracy Theories: Secrecy
and Power in American Culture. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Fuller, Robert C. 1995. Naming the Antichrist: The
History of an American Obsession. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Hofstadter, Richard. 1965. The Paranoid Style in
American Politics, and Other Essays. New York:
Knopf.
Kaplan, Jeffrey. 1997. Radical Religion in America:
Millenarian Movements from the Far Right to the
Children of Noah. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse
University Press.
Lindsey, Hal, with C. C. Carlson. 1970. The Late
Great Planet Earth. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan.
Lipset, Seymour Martin, and Earl Raab. 1970. The
Politics of Unreason; Right Wing Extremism in
America, 1790–1970. Vol. 5. Patterns of American
Prejudice Series. New York: Harper and Row.
O’Leary, Stephen D. 1994. Arguing the Apocalypse:
A Theory of Millennial Rhetoric. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Quinby, Lee. 1999. Millennial Seduction: A Skeptic
Confronts Apocalyptic Culture. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Robbins, Thomas, and Susan J. Palmer, eds. 1997.
Millennium, Messiahs, and Mayhem:
Contemporary Apocalyptic Movements. New
York: Routledge.

Area 51

Robison, John. [1798] 1967. Proofs of a Conspiracy
against All the Religions and Governments of
Europe, Carried on in the Secret Meetings of Free
Masons, Illuminati, and Reading Societies. 4th ed.
with postscript. Boston, MA: Western Islands.
Spear, Robert K. 1992. Surviving Global Slavery:
Living under the New World Order.
Leavenworth, KS: Universal Force Dynamics.
Thompson, Damian. 1998. The End of Time: Faith
and Fear in the Shadow of the Millennium.
Hanover, NH: University Press of New England.
Wessinger, Catherine, ed. 2000. Millennialism,
Persecution, and Violence: Historical Cases.
Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.

Area 51
Made famous by the movie Independence Day,
Area 51 is a classified military base in Nevada near
Groom Lake that is the home to the most advanced
aircraft and weapons testing by the United States.
It is an irony that this highly “secret” base is wellknown enough that tourists know where it is—
although the tight security provided by the Wackenhut corporation ensures that few get close
enough to see much. Area 51 (also called “Dreamland,” for Data Repository and Electronic Amassing Management) covers 38,500 acres of land
northwest of Las Vegas near Rachel, Nevada, and
close to the old Nellis, Nevada, test range. It is nestled within several mountain ranges that provide
still more privacy and security. Nevertheless, television news shows such as Sightings and Strange
Universe have produced features on Area 51. Up to
5,000 personnel per day are flown in on chartered
aircraft; the lands surrounding the base feature
motion sensors, security cameras, and constant
patrols by the Wackenhut guards.
In 1955, the government gave Lockheed Aircraft’s designer of the U-2 spy plane the task of
finding a test base, and after looking at three locations, he selected Groom Lake. Operations commenced later that year under the name “Paradise
Ranch” or simply “The Ranch.” It was officially
designated Area 51 in 1958 by the Atomic Energy
Commission, but in 1970 the United States Air
Force (USAF) took over operations at Groom
Lake, and it is currently administered by the Air

Force Flight Test Facility at Edwards Air Force
Base. The USAF is known to have tested the F-117
Stealth fighter there, and likely the B-2 Spirit
bomber was also tested at Area 51. In the 1970s,
Soviet MiG aircraft were taken there and examined. A number of programs that eventually did not
produce working aircraft or weapons also were
tested there, including cruise missile variants, the
Lockheed Darkstar unmanned vehicle, stealth helicopters, and the Osprey. Lights in the sky have
been seen from a distance on many nights, which
some observers attribute to proton beam systems.
Some claim more than U.S. aircraft are tested
there. Robert Lazar, a videotape producer who
claims to have worked at Area 51, tells lecture audiences that the facility tests alien spaceships and
“reverse-engineers” extraterrestrial technology
under the supervision of the mysterious government body “Majestic 12.” One of the more extravagant claims is that the government is holding
aliens—either living or dead—at the base. (A similar claim is made about Hangar 18 at Wright Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio.) In some
cases, these aliens help humans decipher and
decode the technology, from which, it is alleged,
we have reverse-engineered microwave ovens, cellular phones, and computers.
More exotic technologies are also tested there,
according to Lazar and others. The “Pumpkin
Seed” and Aurora aircraft have supposedly been
operating out of Area 51 for years. But the difficulties associated with reverse-engineering even
earthly technologies are substantial. Even the
Soviet Union found it difficult to work backward
from captured U.S. aircraft. The notion that
humans could create useful weapons or equipment
from the debris of an alien vessel is based on the
presumption that it would not be so advanced as to
defeat any attempts to understand it.
Still others maintain that not only have the aliens
helped us reverse-engineer technology, but they
actually have taken up residence in the towns surrounding Area 51, such as Rachel and Little
A’Le’Inn. According to this view, the aliens act as
extraterrestrial flight instructors for humans, possibly in exchange for access to human subjects upon
91

Arnold, Benedict

whom they conduct tests. More recently, an offshoot of this theory claims that conflict broke out
between the humans and aliens, which resulted in
complete alien dominance of the base at Area 51.
Thus, the base and others like it (the supposed
alien hideouts at Laguna Cartagena, Puerto Rico,
and Archuleta Mesa in New Mexico) have become
alien enclaves that humans may not enter. This was
to provide the foundation for a worldwide takeover
of all humans.
The region around Area 51 is home to “Ufomindand Aliens on Earth,” a small company that specializes in “investigating” the Groom Lake facility.
Regardless of the size of the facility and the known
operations, the U.S. government refuses to
acknowledge the existence of the base.
Larry Schweikart
See also: Aurora.
References
Brown, Stuart. 1994. “Searching for the Secrets of
Groom Lake.” Popular Science, March, 84–85.
Corso, Philip J., with William J. Birnes. 1997. The
Day after Roswell. New York: Pocket Books.
Good, Timothy. [1991] 1993. Alien Contact: TopSecret UFO Files Revealed. New York: Quill.

Arnold, Benedict
A military commander during the American Revolution, Benedict Arnold (1741–1801) felt that he
had been insufficiently rewarded for his service. In
revenge and in order to advance his own flagging
career, Arnold conspired with the loyalists to betray
General Washington by surrendering West Point to
the British in September 1780, but the plot was
foiled.
Son of a prominent Connecticut and Rhode
Island founding family, Benedict Arnold had the
advantages of a sound Latin education and family
support to establish him in a druggist and bookselling business, as well as a good marriage to Margaret Mansfield, the daughter of a prosperous
neighbor. Arnold, however, evidenced a wild
streak, running away at age fifteen to join Connecticut troops fighting the French in the Seven
Years’ War, and engaging in Caribbean trade as the
92

master of a cargo ship. Arnold also served as the
captain of the governor of Connecticut’s guard, a
position he held when news of Lexington and Concord reached him in 1775.
Against the advice of the governor, Arnold
assembled volunteers, armed them from colony
stores, and marched them to Boston to aid in the
struggle. With the support of Dr. Benjamin Warren, Arnold secured a colonel’s commission from
Massachusetts and raised more than 400 men for
an assault on Fort Ticonderoga. En route, he
joined with Ethan Allen and his Vermont men and
tried to assume command over both groups. When
Allen refused, Arnold rankled, but went along as a
volunteer. He was particularly upset that the Connecticut legislature rewarded Allen for this success
by giving him command of the captured fort.
Arnold then proposed a daring winter raid on Quebec, and led a force of approximately 1,000 men
across northern Maine with few supplies, an
achievement that soured when the force proved
unable to take Quebec, even with reinforcements
from American-captured Montreal. Although
badly wounded in the leg, Arnold oversaw the U.S.
withdrawal from Canada, and in a brilliant delaying
tactic, engaged the British in the Battle of Valcour
Island in Lake Champlain, preventing a British
invasion of New England that year.
Although promoted to brigadier for his actions,
Arnold resented the politics of the revolution,
which demanded men of less ability but from more
powerful colonies be given commands. As a supporter of Washington, Arnold also ran afoul of the
members of the Conway cabal, who stalled his promotion and accused him of misusing army property. Learning of a British army marching south
into New York, Washington dispatched Arnold to
join Generals Philip Schuyler and Horatio Gates.
Arnold commanded the left wing at the Battle of
Saratoga, and, acting against the more cautious
Gates’s orders, broke the British advance by rushing onto the field to rally his men, and was again
wounded in the leg.
Washington rewarded the now crippled Arnold
with command of the recently recaptured city of
Philadelphia, where he quickly gathered a willing

Arnold, Benedict

audience of British loyalists and disgruntled rebels
to hear his complaints against the Continental
Congress and fellow commanders: no recognition
for his heroic service, the promotion of junior and
less competent men, and endless politics and petty
gestures. Living beyond his means, Arnold courted
the daughter of William Shippen, a prominent loyalist, and picked fights with the executive council of
Pennsylvania. Joseph Reed, the head of the council, twice brought Arnold to court-martial, and
although Arnold was acquitted of all but two trivial
charges and praised by Washington, he felt
betrayed by the government he had served at such
great cost to himself.
While in Philadelphia, Arnold met Beverly
Robinson and made contact with British officer
John André, a former suitor of Arnold’s fiancée
(and later second wife), Margaret Shippen. Arnold
saw an opportunity to salvage his own career and
the failing cause of the revolution by aiding a
British victory, for which he expected lavish
rewards and a peace treaty that would offer the
colonies the privileges they demanded in the negotiations of 1775. Citing historical instances, including that of General Monck, who engineered the
Restoration of Charles II in 1660, Arnold convinced himself that his motives were of the highest
order. He then asked for and received command of
the key Hudson River fortress of West Point, with
the object of betraying it to the British. Sir Henry
Clinton, the British commander in New York,
promised Arnold 50,000 dollars in gold, and the
commission of a British brigadier-general.
André conferred with Arnold near West Point on
the night of 20 September 1780, and the two men
agreed that the fort should fall as General Washington returned from Hartford, where he was
scheduled to meet with the French commander
Rochambeau. The West Point garrison should be
deployed inefficiently and the British allowed to
take control with as few casualties as possible. Clinton’s men were to attack as Washington approached, with the aim of possibly capturing the
commander-in-chief of the Revolutionary army and
his forces. Unfortunately, André had to leave this
meeting by land, carrying written reports of the

Colonel Benedict Arnold, who commanded the provincial
troops sent against Quebec, and was wounded in storming
that city under General Montgomery. (Library of Congress)

fort’s defenses in his boots, and using a false pass in
the name of “John Anderton.” Going against his
instructions from Clinton, André exchanged his
officer’s greatcoat and scarlet uniform coat for a
borrowed American jacket (this disguise ultimately
led to André being hanged as a spy, rather than as a
British officer).
At Tarrytown, three militiamen stopped André,
and captured him after André wrongly assumed
them to be loyalists and identified himself. André
then attempted to convince them he was a double
agent, acting on a pass from Arnold, but the militiamen, flushed with their triumphant capture,
searched him enthusiastically, revealing the West
Point plans. The local commander, sensing a conspiracy, refused to send André to Arnold, but sent
a letter to West Point asking for instructions.
Meanwhile, Washington’s entourage arrived and
93

Aryan Nations

was eating breakfast with the Arnolds when the
warning letter arrived. Arnold paused to say goodbye to his wife before taking one of his guest’s
horses and escaping to the barge Vulture, moored
down the river, which rowed him to New York City
and the safety of Clinton’s headquarters. Margaret
Shippen Arnold stalled Washington by falling into
hysterics when he arrived, having received a letter
from André himself fully confessing the plan.
Arnold was stunned to be treated shabbily by
Clinton, who disliked Arnold personally and
blamed him for the death of André, Clinton’s adjutant, and did not reward him for the failed venture.
Now in British pay, and with the rank of brigadier,
Arnold led a raid into Virginia in 1781, but accomplished little. In 1782, he arranged to reunite with
his wife and spent the winter in London, where he
was reviled as a turncoat despite being praised by
King George III. After the revolution ended,
Arnold attempted to start a trading business in
New Brunswick, but this failed, and he retired permanently to London on his army pension. Arnold’s
last years were spent in bitterness at his treatment
by the British and resentment at the failure of his
plan to emerge as the savior of America.
Margaret Sankey
See also: American Revolution; Conway Cabal.
References
Brandt, Claire. 1994. The Man in the Mirror: A Life
of Benedict Arnold. New York: Random House.
Martin, James Kirby. 1997. Benedict Arnold,
Revolutionary Hero: An American Warrior
Reconsidered. New York: New York University
Press.
Wallace, Willard M. 1978. Connecticut’s Dark Star
of the Revolution: General Benedict Arnold.
Hartford, CT: New Era Printing.
Wilson, Barry K. 2001. Benedict Arnold: A Traitor in
our Midst. Montreal: McGill University Press.

Aryan Nations
Aryan Nations was founded by Richard Girnt Butler in the 1970s as the political arm of the Church
of Jesus Christ Christian, part of the religious
movement called Christian Identity. Aryan Warriors, as they are called, believe it is their duty to
94

fight for the preservation of the Aryan race against
the scourge of international Jewish communism,
which they believe seeks the destruction of the
white race. Butler was an associate of Wesley
Swift—the founder of the original Church of Jesus
Christ Christian in 1946 and Christian Identity’s
most successful proponent. Butler’s goal for Aryan
Nations has long been to build a white homeland in
the northwest of the United States. Aryan Nations
reached its peak of popularity and influence in the
mid-1980s, following years of inflation, sluggish
economic growth, and the farm crisis. The group
occupied a forty-acre compound in northern
Idaho, which was known by many in the survivalist
right as the international headquarters of white
nationalism. By 1986, Aryan Nations claimed over
6,000 members nationwide, had created eighteen
state offices, and began hosting the Aryan World
Congress, an annual convention of Ku Klux Klan
members, skinheads, and various other neo-Nazis.
Like most Identity Christians, Butler preaches that
only Aryans are descended from Adam and are
engaged in a millennial struggle against the forces
of darkness, the Jews.
Jews are the literal children of Satan, the descendants of Cain, who was the offspring of Eve’s physical seduction by Satan. By controlling the international banking system and promoting such
practices as abortion and intermarriage, “world
Jewry” is gradually forcing the extinction of the
white race. According to the Aryan Nations platform, “The Jew is like a destroying virus that
attacks our racial body to destroy our Aryan culture
and the purity of our Race.” Consequently, Aryan
Warriors prepare for a coming race war, “a day of
reckoning” when the enemy will be defeated and
Christ will establish his true kingdom on earth. In
2000, Aryan Nations was forced into bankruptcy
and the sale of its compound and name after a jury
awarded over six million dollars in a lawsuit
brought by Victoria and Jason Keenan. The
Keenans claimed that they had been assaulted and
shot at by security guards outside the Aryan
Nations Idaho compound. Although its future is in
doubt, several former Aryan Nations members
have founded splinter groups, and the aging Butler,

Asian Americans

Richard G. Butler, standing below two crosses and an Aryan Nations flag, is the founder of Aryan Nations, Church of
Jesus Christ Christian. (Jeff Green/Corbis)

now well into his seventies, has named a successor
and insists the group will rebuild.
Jeff Insko
See also: Christian Identity; Zionist Occupied
Government.
References
Coates, James. 1987. Armed and Dangerous: The
Rise of the Survivalist Right. New York: Hill and
Wang.
Website
Twelve Aryan Nations: http://www.
twelvearyannations.com.

Asian Americans
Like other minorities, Asian Americans have
repeatedly been the target of conspiracy-infused
scapegoating. The term “yellow peril” was first

used to refer to Chinese and later Japanese immigration in the United States in the second half of
the nineteenth century, but it was rapidly extended
to all Asians seen as a threat to Western Christian
civilization. This conspiracy-minded fear gave birth
to an imagery soon exploited by the media (press,
cartoonists, dime novels, comics, and motion pictures) of legions of Asians sweeping into the country, to destroy the white man, and take his job and
his women.
The roots of the “yellow peril” can be traced
back to the time of Attila the Hun and the subsequent sacking of Rome by the Barbarians, and
much later to Genghis Khan and Mongolian invasions of Europe, whose inhabitants lived under the
threat of invasion. These deeply ingrained fears
were passed on from one generation to the other,
95

Asian Americans

and crossed the Atlantic, to be revived in nineteenth-century America.
In the United States, the “yellow peril” needs to
be considered as part of the general ideology of
nativism, which was strengthened by the large
numbers of immigrants entering the country during the nineteenth century. In the case of Asians,
the immigration of Chinese laborers—coolies—
started in the 1840s, accelerating with the 1849
gold rush in California. In 1852, over 20,000 Chinese, mostly from the Canton area, immigrated to
work in gold mines. A new flow started in the late
1860s, when the U.S. government signed the
Burlingame Treaty (1868), which opened the doors
to Chinese workers, wanted to build the transcontinental railroad.
As many historians and wise contemporaries
noted, if they did come to the United States in
search of work, it was because work was available
and there were Americans ready to employ them.
Their attitude toward work and willingness to take
lower wages fueled a debate on whether cheap
labor led to economic instability.
Moreover, as it became rapidly apparent that
many Asians were settling permanently in the
United States, the fear of miscegenation appeared,
a term coined in Irish newspapers, condemning
interracial marriage and the deleterious effects of
sexual contact between the races.
“A Rotten Race”
In California the idea of excluding the Chinese was
part of the wider ideology of nativism. When it
entered the Union as a free state in 1850, California made attempts to legislate against the entrance
of nonwhites, meaning blacks and Asians. In the
1850s, the Chinese outnumbered blacks—4,000
black residents and 47,000 Chinese—and were
seen as a greater threat. As an example of one of
many discriminatory measures, the California
Supreme Court ruled in 1854 that the Chinese
could not testify in court against a white person.
They were gradually driven out of mining and
agriculture; when the transcontinental railroad was
completed in 1869, the Chinese turned to occupations (manufacturing, laundering, and domestic
96

jobs) where they competed with the Irish, another
recent immigrant group, who were instrumental in
developing the “yellow peril” obsession.
Consequently, at the national level, U.S. legislators devoted a lot of energy to controlling Asian
immigration, in spite of the opposition of the supporters of the “open” tradition inaugurated by the
1790 Naturalization Act. Although this act explicitly stated that naturalization was only possible for
“free white persons,” it was targeted at blacks and
not Asians, then considered as belonging to the
“white” category. In 1870, the act was amended to
include blacks while excluding Asians, considered
as “aliens ineligible to citizenship.” In 1882 the
Chinese Exclusion Act made the naturalization of
Chinese people impossible, and closed the gates.
An 1884 amendment tightened both exclusions.
There remained the problem of those Chinese
immigrants already residing in the United States. A
series of race riots starting in California spread to
Washington territory, Wyoming, and New York.
Now the threat was no longer new immigration but
miscegenation.
At the end of the nineteenth century, the United
States defeated the Spanish in the 1898 SpanishAmerican war. Although the acquisition of Cuba,
Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines satisfied
the imperialists, many Americans were alarmed at
the prospect of all those members of “inferior
races” likely to enter the United States. The fear of
“yellow peril” led to more restrictions on immigration, especially when another Asian community,
the Japanese, was unexpectedly and brutally
brought to the fore by international developments
in the Far East. In 1905 the Japanese defeated
the Russian fleet at Port-Arthur, thus winning the
Russo-Japanese War in what was publicized by
the Japanese and sorely experienced by the Westerners as the first time Asian military power triumphed over Western power. Consequently Japan
lost its special exemption from immigration restrictions into the United States, which had allowed the
first Japanese immigrants to go to Hawaii to work
on sugar plantations, quickly followed by others
who came to mainland cities, especially in the far
West. They had arrived with the hope of making a

Atomic Secrets

better life for themselves but often faced racial
prejudice.
In 1908, a gentleman’s agreement signed by
Japan and the United States prohibited Japanese
laborers from entering the country. It was followed
in 1913 and 1920 by the California Alien Land
Laws, which prevented Asian immigrants from
purchasing or leasing land. Finally, in 1922, the
Supreme Court of the United States ruled in
Ozawa v. United States that first-generation Japanese immigrants were not eligible for citizenship,
and in 1924 the Exclusion Act halted Japanese
immigration altogether until 1965.
By 1920 there were well over 100,000 Japanese
immigrants on the U.S. mainland, facing antiJapanese feeling and discriminatory laws. With
World War II came concentration camps, when
Japanese Americans were interned in prison camps
in California and other states because of fears that
they would commit sabotage.
The news of mounting discrimination against
Japanese immigrants and their descendants was
received with shock in Japan, and perceived as
humiliating, especially since Japan had been striving to convince the United States that it was a
friendly nation. This definitely contributed to the
degradation of Japanese and American diplomatic
relations. Only in 1988 did the U.S. Congress issue
a formal apology to wartime internees of Japanese
ancestry.
Concerning the fear of interracial marriage, Congress passed the 1922 Cable Act, which revoked the
citizenship of any woman who married a foreign
national. By 1952, twenty-nine of the forty-eight
states had antimiscegenation laws forbidding marriage between “whites” and “nonwhites.”
At the end of World War II when China fell to
communism, the idea of the “yellow peril” was
superimposed on the threat of the “red menace,”
which symbolically had the effect of locating the
source of the peril no longer at home but abroad.
However, in the 1980s, the notion of a “yellow
peril” was revived as an internal danger through
the fear of Japanese companies seeking to control
the U.S. economy, and Hollywood in particular.
Aïssatou Sy-Wonyu

See also: Japanese Americans; Nativism; Red Scare.
References
Chan, Sucheng. 1991. Asian Americans: An
Interpretative History. Boston, MA: Twayne
Publishers.
Daniels, Roger. 1988. Asian America: Chinese and
Japanese in the United States since 1950. Seattle:
University of Washington Press.
McClain, Charles. 1994. In Search of Equality: The
Chinese Struggle against Discrimination in
Nineteenth-Century America. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Spence, Jonathan D. 1999. The Chan’s Great
Continent: China in Western Minds. New York:
Norton.
Ting Yi Lui, Mary. 1998. “‘The Real Yellow Peril’:
Mapping Racial and Gender Boundaries in New
York City’s Chinatown, 1870–1910.” Hitting
Critical Mass: A Journal of Asian American
Cultural Criticism, 5.1: http://socrates.berkeley.
edu/~critmass/v5n1/luiprint.html.
Tsai, Shih-Shan Henry. 1986. The Chinese
Experience in America. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
Website
Harper’s Weekly, “The Chinese American
Experience: 1857–1892”: http://immigrants.
harpweek.com/ChineseAmericans/4itemsByIndex/
AntiChineseTopPage.htm.

Atomic Secrets
Although there are imagined conspiracies, there
are also real conspiracies, and Soviet atomic spying
belongs to the second category. There was a largescale espionage apparatus reaching into at least
three countries—the United States, Great Britain,
and Canada—during the Cold War. Historians of
the 1960s and 1970s tended to dismiss the accusations of spying as products of popular paranoia during the McCarthy witch-hunts of the 1950s. More
recently, however, with the release of formerly
unavailable U.S. intelligence documents and files
from the Soviet Union, some historians and commentators have begun to reassess the accusations
of atomic spying, arguing that the case has finally
been proven; others remain convinced that the
original charges were exaggerated or fabricated.
The beginning of the story dates back to late
1940, when Leonid Kvasnikov of the scientific and
97

Atomic Secrets

Soviet spy and physicist Klaus Fuchs. (Hulton-Deutsch
Collection/Corbis)

intelligence section of the NKVD (the Communist
secret police) noted a flurry of publications in
Western scientific journals dealing with atomic
energy following the German chemist Otto Hahn’s
successful splitting of the uranium atom. Kvasnikov
instructed NKVD agents abroad to keep a watch
for developments in that area.
The most important response came in September 1941—most likely from John Cairncross, then
private secretary to the British government’s top
scientific adviser and one of the “Cambridge Five”
recruited as Soviet spies in the 1930s—telling of
British plans to develop an atomic bomb. Further
details about these plans were supplied by a German Communist émigré scientist working in
Britain named Klaus Fuchs. The upshot was that
98

Kvasnikov was sent to New York at the end of 1942
to head up atomic spying in the United States.
Lax (or worse) British security procedures that
failed to follow up reports about Fuchs’s Communist ties allowed him to be transferred to the Manhattan Project’s atom bomb building program at
Los Alamos in New Mexico. Fuchs was probably
the most important source supplying the Soviets
information about how to overcome the technical
problems of producing the plutonium bomb.
Although he provided data about the proposed
hydrogen bomb, his contribution to the Soviets in
that area was not as significant.
Fuchs was not the only Soviet spy at Los Alamos,
but U.S. security officials made the mistake of dealing quietly via dismissal or transfer with those suspected of passing on information. The public at
large remained ignorant of the problem until the
defection in September 1945 of Igor Gouzenko, a
code clerk at the Soviet embassy in Ottawa,
Canada. The data turned over by Gouzenko
revealed a Soviet espionage network headed by the
two top leaders of the Canadian Communist Party
that included Alan Nunn May, a British physicist
working for the Canadian atomic research program.
Despite the Gouzenko revelations, the search
for atomic spies did not move into high gear until
after the explosion of the first Soviet atomic bomb
in August 1949. U.S. investigators focused their
attention on Fuchs, who had by this time returned
to Britain. Under questioning, Fuchs confessed in
early 1950 to his own spying—but with one exception refused to name others involved. And even
regarding that one exception—his contact in the
United States, Harry Gold—Fuchs did not take the
initiative but simply confirmed his identity after
Gold had become suspect from other sources.
The reputation of British counterintelligence
was further tarnished when the Italian-born physicist Bruno Pontecorvo and his wife defected to the
Soviets in August-September 1950. An even more
devastating blow was the flight behind the Iron
Curtain in May 1951 of two of the “Cambridge
Five”—diplomats Donald Maclean and Guy
Burgess. Maclean was the bigger Soviet prize

Atomic Secrets

because he had been the representative of the
British embassy in Washington, D.C., dealing with
the political aspects of atomic energy.
The Rosenbergs
By this time, the major focus of action had shifted
to the United States, with the arrest on 23 May
1950 of Harry Gold. Gold’s confession implicated
David Greenglass, who had worked as a mechanic
at Los Alamos, and his wife Ruth. They implicated
David’s sister, Ethel Rosenberg, and her husband
Julius. The trial and execution (19 June 1953) of
the Rosenbergs remains controversial because of
complaints about the bias of the presiding judge,
prejudicial actions by the prosecution, and the
excessiveness of the penalty. Many on the Left
have argued (and continue to argue) that the
Rosenbergs were the victims of a deliberate government conspiracy to frame them (or, in a lesser
charge, that the government succumbed to the
public hysteria in pushing for the death penalty),
but in the eyes of most historians there now
remains no question about Julius Rosenberg’s guilt.
More doubtful is how active a role had been played
by his wife. She appears to have been included in
the prosecution as a lever to pressure Rosenberg
into naming others, and the Greenglasses—who
were the government’s major witnesses—changed
their testimony about her involvement only on the
eve of the trial. On the other hand, Julius could
have saved his life and hers by cooperating with the
government had he not put his loyalty to the Stalinist regime first.
An even more valuable Soviet informant was
Theodore A. (Ted) Hall, who had come to Los
Alamos in 1944 as a nineteen-year-old scientific
prodigy. At least as Hall would later tell the story,
he had not been recruited, but had approached the
Soviets on his own initiative because he felt that a
United States monopoly of the atomic bomb would
be a threat to the world. Although Hall came under
suspicion, the Federal Bureau of Investigation
lacked sufficient hard evidence for an arrest before
he and his wife left for Britain. There he built a
successful career as a scientist. His definitive exposure would not come until the 1990s.

The one major actor accused of spying whose
guilt remains open to question is J. Robert Oppenheimer, who had headed the Los Alamos project.
Oppenheimer’s opposition to building the hydrogen
bomb reinforced suspicions about his loyalty growing out of his close personal ties with Communists
and fellows travelers. Hearings in 1954 resulted in
the revocation of his security clearance. Although
Oppenheimer’s defenders charge that he was the
victim of a baseless witch-hunt, new evidence
shows that at a minimum, he had been guilty of failing to inform security officials fully about Soviet
infiltration efforts of which he had knowledge.
One of the difficulties in countering Soviet
atomic espionage was that the culprits were ideologically motivated rather than spies-for-hire. Thus,
few would cooperate even when caught and even
fewer would express any regret. Although Fuchs
pretended to do so, he left for East Germany after
his release, announced that he was still a loyal
Marxist, and went on to become director of the
East German Central Institute for Nuclear Physics.
Estimates of the contribution made by espionage to speeding up the building of the Soviet
atomic bomb range from a minimum of eighteen
months to a maximum of five years. And except for
the Rosenbergs none of the guilty suffered punishment commensurate with the enormity of their
crimes. Even those imprisoned—such as May,
Fuchs, David Greenglass, and Gold—served no
more than part of their sentences before release.
Ruth Greenglass avoided prosecution because of a
deal struck by her husband in return for his testimony. At least two of Julius Rosenberg’s accomplices—Joel Barr and Alfred Sarant—fled the
country and successfully disappeared. None of the
“Cambridge Five” spent a day of prison time.
Worst, Anatoly Yatskov, Kvasnikov’s successor as
top Soviet atomic spy master in the United States,
would boast that at most half of his spy network
had been uncovered.
John Braeman
See also: Antiommunism; Hiss, Alger; House
Un-American Activities Committee; Venona
Project.

99

Aurora

References
Albright, Joseph, and Maria Kunstel. 1997.
Bombshell: The Secret Story of America’s
Unknown Atomic Spy Conspiracy. New York:
Times Books.
Granatstein, J. L., and David Stafford. 1990. Spy
Wars: Espionage and Canada from Gouzenko to
Glasnost. Toronto: Key Porter.
Herken, Gregg. 2002. The Brotherhood of the
Bomb: The Tangled Lives and Loyalties of Robert
Oppenheimer, Ernest Lawrence, and Edward
Teller. New York: Henry Holt.
Holloway, David. 1994. Stalin and the Bomb: The
Soviet Union and Atomic Energy 1939–1956.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Hyde, H. Montgomery. 1980. The Atomic Bomb
Spies. New York: Atheneum.
Radosh, Ronald, and Joyce Milton. 1997. The
Rosenberg File: The Search for the Truth. Rev. ed.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
West, Nigel, and Oleg Tsarev. 1998. The Crown
Jewels: The British Secrets at the Heart of the
KGB Archives. London: HarperCollins.
Williams, Robert Chardwell. 1987. Klaus Fuchs: Atom
Spy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Aurora
Following the initial research and development of
a hypersonic “scramjet”-powered aircraft in the
early 1980s, and the funding of the National Aerospace Plane (NASP) in 1984 (often mischaracterized as the “Orient Express”), rumors began to
swirl that either the Air Force or the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) had
already funded a secret, ultrafast aircraft code
named “Aurora.” Adding to the rumors, the SR-71
Blackbird was retired in the 1980s, leaving the
United States ostensibly with no human-piloted
supersonic spy aircraft.
Popular Science frequently ran artists’ illustrations of a “secret, hypersonic jet” that was supposedly based at Area 51 near Groom Lake, Nevada—
the site of the Defense Department’s most
classified projects. The aircraft’s proposed propulsion was as shrouded in mystery as its existence.
NASP was to use a supersonic combustion ramjet,
which requires no moving parts to achieve compression of the air as a turbojet does, but instead
100

relies on the forward speed of air coming through
the intake to a funnel to compress the air, known as
“scramjet.” This itself constituted a major obstacle
in the program, because no wind tunnel even
existed to test any article at a speed beyond Mach
8, while tunnels capable of testing larger articles for
longer times could only generate winds up to Mach
5. (NASP was intended to fly at Mach 25, while
Aurora, according to the magazine accounts, was
supposedly capable of Mach 10.) Thus, the concept
for building the aerospace plane as an entire aircraft system in the first place rested, in part, on the
premise that to “test it you had to fly it.”
The “Pumpkin Seed,” another propulsion system linked to Aurora, involved a shock-wave pulse
engine in which the exploding fuel propelled the
aircraft through the sky at hypersonic speeds by
exerting pressure on the aircraft’s flattened body, as
when one squeezes a pumpkin seed between the
thumb and forefinger. The “Pumpkin Seed” supposedly released a telltale vapor trail of smoke in
puffs, much like a cigarette, rather than a steady
stream. The more widely held view of the propulsion system of any secret spy plane involved the
scramjet, which needed another engine to get it up
to supersonic speeds, at which point the scramjet
could take over. A scramjet, in the most simplistic
sense, is a funnel that compresses air going into the
intake. The compression of the air forces it through
the engine at vastly faster speeds, like putting one’s
thumb over the end of a hose to accelerate the
stream of water. Igniting and combusting the fuel
is a monumental task, compared to lighting a
match in a hurricane. To facilitate combustion and
airflow, the entire aircraft must become part of the
engine design, with the forebody an intake and the
aft section an exhaust. Eventually, most experts
agreed a “lifting body” design (wide and flat, with
short, stubby wings) was desirable.
If observers reported seeing a “Pumpkin Seed”
aircraft that supposedly was the Aurora, another
variant of the “secret hypersonic jet” story involved
diverted funding from the NASP program. According to this well-circulated view, NASP was a front
program to channel money to the real hypersonic
program, the Aurora. In this theory, NASP was

Aurora

deliberately underfunded so as to keep it barely
operable while the real support went to the black
hypersonic program. Artist conceptions of Auroras
appeared, usually with text claiming they were
already in existence and conducting spy operations.
Most of these reports placed the speeds at between
Mach 6 and Mach 10. And yet another variant of
the story had the Aurora as a stealth aircraft—
something extremely difficult to accomplish at the
speeds credited to it.
Meanwhile, NASP found its funding cut repeatedly, until the goal of constructing an actual aircraft—even a subscale vehicle, which partially used
rocket power—was abandoned. By that time, the
Air Force and NASA still struggled with a scaleddown project to fly a scramjet atop a Minuteman
missile, and even that was canceled. When NASP
ended in 1995, it had failed to build any full-sized
scramjet engines, let alone an aircraft powered by
a scramjet. The NASP/scramjet technology was
divided into three smaller programs, including the
X-33 and Hyper-X programs.
Rumors, however, continued to circulate about a
new hypersonic spy plane called the Aurora. As early
as 1992, the Wall Street Journal ran the headline
“Evidence Points to Secret U.S. Spy Plane,” and a
year later, Popular Science touted a “Secret Mach 6
Spy Plane.” Starting in 1994, Popular Science frequently ran articles on “the Secrets of Groom Lake.”
That year, the Federation of American Scientists
alleged that NASP money was diverted for Aurora,

claiming that Aurora’s budget was “hidden in plain
sight” with the aerospace plane. In fact, the NASP
budget was minuscule compared to the technological challenge. By 1990, according to the original
1986 plans, the program was to have been at $1 billion per year and was increasing. Instead, it was at
$250 million and falling—an amount that could not
fund any serious technology, let alone a “super
secret spy plane.” A more significant issue for the
proponents of the Aurora to address was the lack of
progress on any kind of scramjet engines. Numerous
tests, at dozens of Air Force and NASA labs associated with NASP by 1995, had yet to get scramjet
engines to generate thrust over drag. Moreover, the
tests that had been conducted involved running
scramjets at fractions of seconds. Whereas the
Blackbird utilized existing technology, improved by
important innovations, moving an aircraft to the
Mach 6–Mach 10 levels would have required an
order-of-magnitude leap in technology not present
in U.S. aeronautics in the 1990s.
Larry Schweikart
See also: Area 51.
References
Brown, Stuart. 1994. “Searching for the Secrets of
Groom Lake.” Popular Science, March, 84–85.
Harris, Roy, Jr. 1992. “Evidence Points to Secret
U.S. Spy Plane.” Wall Street Journal, 4
December.
Sweetman, Bill. 1993. “Out of the Black: Secret
Mach 6 Spy Plane.” Popular Science, March,
56–60; 62–63; 98–100.

101

B
B-25 Ghost Bomber
On 31 January 1956, a Mitchell B-25 Bomber en
route to Olmstead Air Force Base near Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania, ran out of fuel over the Pittsburgh
area. The pilot was forced to ditch the plane in the
Monongahela River near Homestead, Pennsylvania, after failing to make it to the Greater Pittsburgh Airport. The plane disappeared beneath the
water and was never seen again. Eyewitnesses soon
came forward, claiming that the plane had been
secretly removed from the river at night. Rumors
and speculations about the bomber’s secret cargo
spread quickly in the cold-war climate of industrial
western Pennsylvania.
Flight B-25N No. 44–29125 originated at Nellis
Air Force Base, Nevada, on 30 January. After an
overnight stop at Tinker Air Force Base, Oklahoma, the flight continued to Selfridge Air Force
Base, Michigan. At Selfridge the plane was supposed to refuel, but it was discovered that it would
take three hours. The crew believed that they had
enough fuel to reach Olmstead, so they departed at
2:43 P.M. without refueling. Over western Pennsylvania the fuel ran out and the pilot ditched in the
Monongahela River at approximately 4:10 P.M.
Recovery attempts began soon after, and the police
and people working by the river rescued four crew
members. The other two crew members drowned
and their bodies were recovered later that year.
Reports of a fifth and even a sixth man being pulled
from the water circulated immediately, with newspaper stories appearing to verify this account.

According to the official record, the fifth man was
a rescuer who went into the river to help, but others believed he was a secret passenger. Initially, the
Coast Guard supervised the attempts to retrieve
the aircraft, but on 9 February the operation was
taken over by the Army Corps of Engineers. They
searched for two weeks, but the plane was never
located.
After the crash, many people came forward
claiming to have seen the covert removal of the aircraft. Most of these accounts describe the removal
of the plane by unidentified government agents in
the middle of the night. These accounts often
describe the plane being cut apart and loaded on a
barge or train to be shipped off to a local military
base. Proponents of the secret removal theory cite a
variety of evidence other than eyewitness reports to
prove their case. It has been pointed out that it is
difficult to lose a plane that is 12 feet tall with a 70foot wingspan in a river that has an average depth of
20–25 feet and a width of between 800 and 1,000
feet. In all other aircraft accidents involving the
river, the planes have been recovered quickly. Witnesses to the salvage operation reported seeing a
helicopter fly over the crash site with a Geiger
counter. They also point to problems in the official
Air Force accident report. It contains discrepancies
in the flight manifests and the cause factor analysis,
and vital parts of the account of the crash are
blacked out. Questions have also been raised about
the original weight of the aircraft. This led to speculation that the weight of the secret cargo caused
103

Bacon’s Rebellion

the crew to underestimate the amount of fuel
needed. Several researchers have suggested that
the secret cargo was some type of nerve gas or
chemical weapon, since there were experiments
with chemical weapons conducted in Oklahoma at
the time. Other theories about the makeup of the
cargo include atomic materials, secret or state-ofthe-art communications and radar technology,
Mafia money, a Russian defector, Howard Hughes,
and even Las Vegas showgirls.
In the late 1990s, new scientific searches for the
plane have been conducted with the use of side
scan sonar and divers. The B-25 Recovery Group
and the Historical Society of Western Pennsylvania
have speculated that the plane may rest in a 40foot-deep gravel pit on the bottom of the Monongahela River, which has been filled in with silt since
the time of the accident. All of their searches to
date have been unsuccessful, and some view this as
further proof that there was a secret removal of the
aircraft.
Thomas White
References
B-25 Recovery Group Records, 1992–2001. Library
and Archives, Historical Society of Western
Pennsylvania. Pittsburgh, PA.
Fine, Steve. 1985. “An Enigma of 22 Years.”
Pittsburgh Magazine, 19 June, 65–67.
Hayes, John. 1966. “The Bomber in the Mon.”
Pittsburgh City Paper, 31 January–6 February.
Kulamer, John. 1956. “Four Rescued as B-25 Falls
into Icy River.” The Pittsburgh Press,1 February.
Smith, Martin. 1981. “Is There a Solution to B-25
Mystery?” The Pittsburgh Press, 8 February.
Smith, Martin. 1981. “Mon Hides B-25—Or Does
It?” The Pittsburgh Press, 1 February.

Bacon’s Rebellion
In 1676, Nathaniel Bacon led a group of planters,
small landholders, indentured servants, and slaves
first in defiance of, then in assault on the colonial
government of Virginia. Accusing the royal governor Sir William Berkeley, his cousin by marriage, of
conspiring with hostile Native Americans to enrich
himself and his cronies, Bacon and his adherents
launched a campaign of genocidal violence along
104

the frontier, plundered the estates of Berkeley’s
supporters, and burned the colonial capital,
Jamestown, to the ground. Berkeley, who fled the
capital and only returned when British troops
arrived to restore order after the rebellion’s failure,
accused his rebellious relation of a conspiracy to
overthrow the government of Virginia.
As in most agrarian resistance movements in
colonial America, Bacon’s Rebellion found its roots
in a mix of economic, regional, and racial tensions.
In the 1660s and 1670s, the pressure of former
indentured servants migrating west in search of
land and independence escalated social and political tensions along the colony’s western frontiers.
The context of falling tobacco prices, declining
opportunities for landownership, high taxes, lack of
political representation, and political favoritism in
the Indian trade cemented an unlikely alliance of
small landowners, frontier planters, indentured servants, and slaves. The depredations of the AngloDutch wars underscored a climate of violent political struggle. The resulting instability threatened
dangerous consequences and opened the way for a
demagogic insurrection.
In 1675, a dispute between indigenous Doegs and
a frontier farmer touched off a series of bloody
attacks, providing a catalyst for the conflicts and
resentments within Virginia’s colonial population.
Bacon forced a commission from Berkeley, raised a
vigilante force, and launched a campaign of indiscriminate reprisals against indigenous people,
butchering innocent Susquehannocks alongside
enemy Doegs. Threatened by Bacon’s disobedience,
the governor called the colony’s first election in fifteen years. Bacon was elected to the House of
Burgesses, but Berkeley had him arrested when he
arrived in Jamestown to take his seat. Berkeley soon
released Bacon, sending him out to recruit an antiIndian militia and defend the frontiers. When Bacon
took his commission as a mandate for the large-scale
slaughter of the region’s native peoples, Berkeley
reversed his position and declared Bacon a traitor.
Accusing Berkeley of sacrificing the safety of
European settlers in the interest of kickbacks and
profits from the Indian trade, and fearing that
Berkeley and his followers were conspiring to

Banco Nazionale del Lavoro

assassinate him, Bacon made true his traitor’s label,
turning his force on the capital. His militias looted
and pillaged the properties of Berkeley supporters,
burning the capital to the ground in the process.
Bacon and his men gained de facto control over the
colony until his untimely death from dysentery in
October 1676.
Bacon’s Rebellion proved the largest and most
successful rebellion in colonial history before the
American Revolution. Whether the act of a powerhungry political opportunist or a freedom fighter
(albeit of a staunchly undemocratic character),
Nathaniel Bacon’s Rebellion foreshadowed growing socioeconomic and political tensions in the
developing colonies—an environment ripe for
resistance, revolt, and intrigue.
James Carrott
See also: Native Americans; Slave Revolts.
References
Brown, Kathleen. 1996. Goodwives, Nasty Wenches,
and Anxious Patriarchs: Gender, Race, and Power
in Colonial Virginia. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press.
Morgan, Edmund. 1975. American Slavery,
American Freedom: The Ordeal of Colonial
Virginia. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Washburn, Wilcomb. 1957. The Governor and the
Rebel: A History of Bacon’s Rebellion in Virginia.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Banco Nazionale del Lavoro
An Italian bank with alleged conspiracy connections
to BCCI (Bank of Credit and Commerce International), the Vatican, George H. W. Bush, the Bank
of England, and the Gulf War, Banco Nazionale del
Lavoro (BNL) is viewed as partially responsible for
funding Saddam Hussein’s military buildup. BNL,
according to the theorists, is partially owned by the
Vatican and is also viewed as a source for laundering drug money. In fact, BNL, which is the largest
Italian bank in terms of deposits, is 96 percent government owned. As of 1990, it had more than $100
billion in assets worldwide, and as one of the Italian
banks to open offices in Ethiopia during the era of
Italian occupation, BNL had important connections
in the Arab world. In the United States, BNL had

offices in Atlanta, Chicago, Los Angeles, and
Miami.
Most of the conspiracy criticism stems from lending made by the Atlanta, Georgia, branch of the
BNL—coincidentally the same city in which BCCI
conducted its operations—between 1983 and 1990.
According to Representative Henry Gonzalez (DTX) of the House Banking Committee, BNL made
over $3 billion in unauthorized loans to Saddam
Hussein’s Iraq. In addition, the Reagan–Bush administrations authorized more than $5 billion in loan
guarantees to Iraq. Even some of the unauthorized
loans, critics claimed, were indirectly supported by
the Department of Agriculture. At the time the
loans were made, the U.S. government considered
Iraq the “lesser of two evils” compared to its archenemy, Iran, and therefore decided it was desirable
to prop up the Iraqi dictator.
Still, as Gonzalez charged, BNL was not just
another regulatory failure, but was a failure of U.S.
foreign policy in that it linked loans to Iraq’s military buildup. (This, of course, was common practice in virtually all administrations—numerous
Communist and otherwise hostile states received
U.S. aid on a regular basis). However, critics went
further than the standard complaints about giving
away money to “America’s enemies.” In 1991,
Sherman Skolnick and others claimed that BNL
was suppressing bank records of Hussein’s “private
business partner,” President George Bush, through
oil “kickbacks.”
Actually, it was the government that began the
investigation into BNL’s illegal activities, starting
with a 1989 “raid” on BNL offices in Atlanta that
revealed an “off books” lending operation to Iraq
that had been occurring since 1987. These transactions were recorded in separate, secret books that
recorded the money laundering as “commodities”
financing. It was through these commodities financing arrangements that the U.S. Department of Agriculture, through the Foreign Agricultural Service,
began to make short-term credit guarantees to eligible nations. Iraq had begun to acquire U.S. commodities under the program in 1983, even before
diplomatic relations were fully restored, mainly in
an effort by the Reagan administration to provide a
105

Bank of Credit and Commerce International

barrier to the threat coming from Iran’s jihad. But as
soon as Hussein invaded Kuwait, all Iraqi agricultural loans were suspended.
Even critics such as Gonzalez admitted that the
fraudulent use of the USDA loan guarantees was not
known until after August 1989, at which time investigators found that Iraq had falsified the types of
commodities it purchased; overstated the costs (to
funnel money into the military); and shifted financing costs onto still other lending programs. In addition, Iraq worked a “scam” on the Import–Export
Bank from 1987 to 1990, skimming off yet another
$300 million. Congress, under Rep. Gonzalez,
launched an investigation of BNL in 1990. According to Attorney General Richard Thornburgh, the
public airing of the details of the cases brought by
the U.S. Attorney’s Office “raises the prospect that
culpable parties will elude prosecution.” Using the
same language later used by Janet Reno in her many
“no-comments” about the campaign finance irregularities of the Clinton–Gore administrations, Thornburgh claimed that congressional interference in
“ongoing criminal investigations” would jeopardize
the prosecution of guilty individuals.
BNL’s “conspiracy heritage” did not suffer from
its connections to Henry Kissinger, whose legal
firm represented the bank during the 1980s in
international sales and contracts. As an international bank, BNL also had contacts to the Bank of
England, the Federal Reserve Board, BCCI, and
the collapse of Banco Ambrosiano in Italy in 1982.
The Ambrosiano failure is viewed by some conspiracists as particularly important because it had CIA
connections, as well as links to the Mafia, the
Masons, and the U.S. Savings and Loan scandal.
One website manages to tie together cocaine, the
Masons, the mob, all the banking scandals, Ronald
Reagan, George Bush, Margaret Thatcher, and the
Barings (though, interestingly enough, not the
Rothschilds or the Rockefellers).
Larry Schweikart
See also: Savings and Loan Crisis.
References
Beaty, Jonathan and S. C. Gwynne. 1993. The
Outlaw Bank: A Wild Ride into the Secret Heart
of BCCI. New York: Random House.

106

Ehrenfeld, Rachel. 1992. Evil Money: Encounters
along the Money Trail. New York: HarperCollins.
Gup, Benton E. 1995. Targeting Fraud: Uncovering
and Deterring Fraud in Financial Institutions.
Chicago, IL: Probus.
Kwitny, Jonathan. 1987. The Crimes of Patriots: A
True Tale of Dope, Dirty Money, and the CIA.
New York: W. W. Norton.
Websites
Congressional Record, 4 February 1991: http://www.
fas.org/spp/starwars/congress/1991/h910204g.htm.
“DeepBlackLies”: http://www.deepblacklies.co.
uk/the_money_fountain.htm.

Bank of Credit and Commerce International
Known as the “Outlaw Bank,” the Bank of Credit
and Commerce International (BCCI) was established in the Middle East in 1972 as the Third
World’s first multinational bank after failing to
acquire the Chelsea National Bank in New York.
Some contended that the British were behind the
bank as part of their “long-standing scheme”
(according to conspiracy researcher Sherman Skolnick) to overthrow the U.S. government. Others
viewed with suspicion the bank’s Third World connections to Middle Eastern investors—it was
founded by Agha Hasa Abedi, a Pakistani Muslim
Shiite-turned-Sufi financial advisor, and dealt
extensively with renegade Muslim governments.
The bank’s activities were made all the more suspicious by the close connection of BCCI to Washington insiders such as former Carter administration
official Bert Lance.
BCCI was more than a bank. As the authors of
The Outlaw Bank observed, BCCI “possessed its
very own diplomatic corps, intelligence network,
and private army, its own shipping and commodities trading companies” (Beaty and Gwynne).
BCCI’s size and scope of operations threatened to
make it a heavyweight even among existing multinational corporations. Unlike General Motors or
Mitsubishi—both technically multinational corporations—BCCI had no national allegiance and the
managers operated as though they were free from
any constraints of national sovereignty.

Bank of Credit and Commerce International

Abedi, who was trained as a banker, was allied
with Zayed bin Sultan al-Nahayan of the United
Arab Emirates, who funneled money into Abedi’s
Pakistani bank. In the early 1970s, with Zayed’s
support, Abedi met with U.S bankers from the
Bank of America to present his concept for a Third
World bank with offices in the Middle East, London, and Luxembourg. Bloated with oil profits,
Middle Eastern governments were looking for
places to deposit their “petrodollars” that would be
safe and generate a return. Forming the Bank of
Credit and Commerce International in 1972,
Abedi used numerous front men to attempt to purchase Chelsea National Bank in New York before
regulators stopped the acquisition. BCCI then
opened a Cayman Islands subsidiary in 1976.
The following year Abedi first met T. Bertram
“Bert” Lance, the budget director in Jimmy
Carter’s administration. Lance had been the chief
executive officer of National Bank of Georgia—the
largest lender to Carter’s Georgia peanut business—and Lance had been indicted, then found
innocent, of several financial improprieties while at
National Bank. Abedi and Lance developed a relationship in which Lance served as an “advisor” to
Abedi, specifically when it came to acquiring
Financial General Bankshares, a Washington bankholding company. Lance mentioned that his own
National Bank of Georgia was up for sale, and
Abedi orchestrated a purchase for the bank (and
Lance’s 12 percent interest in it) through a front
man, Ghaith Pharaon, in 1978. The new owners
also acquired Clark Clifford, former secretary of
defense, as BCCI’s lawyer. BCCI was already skirting legality in its surface operations.
Below the surface, the bank was financing arms
trade, drug smuggling, and a host of other illegal
activities, laundering the money through front
operations. BCCI agents were involved in bribery,
fraud, grand larceny, and tax evasion. It illegally
acquired First American Bank of New York
through front agents in 1982, and Independence
Bank of Encino (California) in 1985, concealing
the ownership of the subsidiaries from the government. Regulators raised concerns that Abedi or
other unnamed individuals were in fact issuing all

the orders for BCCI’s U.S. subsidiaries. In 1985 the
CIA issued a report warning that BCCI had
obtained control of First American, a point that
was finally admitted in public in 1988.
The scope of BCCI’s illegal activities, and its
apparent flouting of U.S. banking law, should have
provoked a response from either the executive or
legislative branches, but no such response came.
Finally, in 1989, the New York Police Department
launched an investigation of BCCI. Trials and
audits produced evidence that BCCI was involved
in money laundering, was in debt nearly $2 billion,
and that the key stockholders were all Middle Eastern investors, including Sheikh Zayed. Juries in
several states convicted BCCI officials on a variety
of charges, and Treasury and FBI agents seized
BCCI offices and assets.
The Federal Reserve authorities overlooked or
ignored BCCI activities until other parts of the justice system had cracked down, leading to further
charges of “insider” favoritism. In 1991, a coordinated offensive by regulators in several countries
shut down BCCI operations and froze more than
$20 billion in BCCI funds, accounting for 75 percent of the total. U.S. regulators from the Federal
Reserve and the Treasury required BCCI to divest
itself of any U.S. banks purchased illegally, and later
that year the Federal Reserve fined BCCI $200
million. BCCI principal officers were arrested and
convicted of money laundering, bribery, larceny,
and other charges.
BCCI had engaged in a wide range of illegal
activities, but it had also provided a financial front
for sensitive financial and weapons transfers that the
government wanted to keep off the record. The
bank assisted Adnan Kashoggi in financing the sale
of arms to Iran as part of the Iran-Contra scandal. It
also became involved in the Banco Nazionale del
Lavaro in Atlanta, which loaned Iraq’s Saddam Hussein some $600 million. Hussein used the money, as
well as funds from agricultural loans, to acquire
weapons. In 1990, Hussein invaded Kuwait and had
to be driven out in the Gulf War. Both the CIA and
the Justice Department accused the other of failing
sufficiently to investigate the bank. In fact, the Justice Department did not realize the magnitude of
107

Bank of England

the criminal activity with which it was dealing, and
the CIA had an interest in keeping some of its operations quiet.
In 1991, BCCI was effectively bankrupt,
although neither Price Waterhouse, the accounting
firm that audited BCCI, nor the government of
Abu Dhabi, made public the bank’s troubles, costing depositors millions of dollars. The following
year, Congress completed its investigation of how
BCCI went under, concluding that the failure to
appreciate the bank’s criminal activities was attributed to “gaps” in the regulations and to an army of
well-financed lawyers. Even though BCCI has
been out of business, conspiracy theorists such as
Sherman Skolnick contend that it continues to
operate through shadow organizations or through
established institutions such as the Bank of
England. BCCI’s extensive clientele, its vast sums
of unregulated money, and its insider U.S. political
partners made it a natural for conspiracy theories
of all types.
Larry Schweikart
See also: Banco Nazionale del Lavoro; Federal
Reserve Bank.
References
Beaty, Jonathan, and S. C. Gwynne. 1993. The
Outlaw Bank: A Wild Ride into the Secret Heart
of BCCI. New York: Random House.
Kerry, John, and Hank Brown. 1992. The BCCI
Affair: A Report to the Committee on Foreign
Relations, United States Senate. 102d Congress,
2d Session. http://www.fas.org/irp/congress/
1992_rpt/bcci.

Bank of England
Like the Bank of the United States and the Federal
Reserve System, the Bank of England was the
focus of numerous conspiracy theories almost from
the time of its founding in 1694 through the Tonnage Act. William of Orange, the king of England,
who needed money for a war in France, authorized
the formation of a bank under the act that had the
authority to issue notes, using the loans against the
crown as collateral. The Bank was privately owned,
but, according to conspiracy theorists, the names of
108

the founders were kept secret, although the names
of all stock subscribers appeared in the subscription book.
A myriad of complaints about the Bank’s operations arose, and to even reference all of them
would border on the impossible. Among the main
criticisms by the conspiracy theorists were the supposed inconvertibility of the notes into gold and silver (“paper money created out of thin air,” as Pat
Robertson claimed); connections with the Rothschild family; a pipeline to stolen gold supplied by
Dutch thieves; and manipulations of the international financial system in concert with the Federal
Reserve, Jews, and/or the Vatican. Among the
many attacks on the Bank of England were theories
that the Bank was a pawn in the hands of a Jewish
cabal whose intention was to split Christianity, or
that the monarchy had simply confiscated the gold
of the London goldsmiths. One version included
allegations that the king had obtained the capital
from the Bank through taxation, while another
claimed it was (as with other central banks) controlling the economy through its manipulation of
the money supply, even as early as 1700. Through
the Bank, then, secret groups could control the
monarchy and thus control England.
In more recent years, the Bank of England has
become one of the villains in the New World Order
conspiracy theories, usually aligned with either the
Federal Reserve, the Rockefellers/Rothschilds, or
Jews. In this view, the Bank of England as early as
300 years ago had been used by conspirators to
control international finances outside of parliamentary scrutiny (despite the fact that it was
nationalized by the British government in 1946).
Even the nationalization of the Bank, though, has
been viewed as a continuation of the conspiracy,
with the Bank now powerful enough to demand
that the government incorporate it into the official
levers of power. Eustace Mullins argues that the
Federal Reserve was a puppet of an international
banking elite tied to the Bank of England: “The
most powerful men in the United States were
themselves answerable to another power, a foreign
power, and a power which had been steadfastly
seeking to extend its control over the young repub-

Bank of England

Bank of England. (Library of Congress)

lic since its very inception. The power was the
financial power of England, centered in the London Branch of the House of Rothschild” (Mullins,
47–48).
Related to this view of the Bank of England is
the notion that the Rockefellers, the Trilateral
Commission, the Bilderbergers, and others have
used the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England
to manipulate the money supplies of democratic
nations. According to these theories, which take
several forms, the Rockefellers (and/or Trilateralists) have filled the boards of the Federal Reserve
and the Bank of England with “their people” and
thus control the supply of money, generating inflation to support political candidates or forcing deflation on the economy to benefit rich lenders. These
views, as seen in the web sites of J. Orlin Grabbe
and Sherman Skolnick, often contain contradictory
positions on gold, which has traditionally been seen
by conspiracy theorists as the “firewall” against
inflationary government spending. Current con-

spiracy theorists have now sought to include gold
manipulations by the Federal Reserve and/or Bank
of England within the broader allegations about
control of the money supply. In another version,
the British royal family’s intermarriage to Jews gave
the Rothschilds an open door to control the Bank
of England, and hence the world’s financial structure.
Paranoia about the Bank of England led evangelist Pat Robertson, in his book The New World
Order, to claim that the Bank was originally established to issue fiat money without genuine gold
backing—money “created out of thin air,” as he
said. In these charges, Robertson echoed the
Depression-era Catholic radio priest, Father
Charles Coughlin, who likewise distorted the
nature and origins of the Bank of England.
Early Americans also feared that the Bank of
England had secret investors in the First and Second Banks of the United States, or that it routinely
caused panics or depressions in North America. In
109

Bank of the United States

fact, the panic of 1837 can indirectly be traced to the
Bank of England, but only insofar as the Bank raised
interest rates after silver shipments from Mexico to
the United States dried up, thus diminishing the
flow of silver from the United States to China, then
on to England where the silver was held as a reserve.
However, at worst the Bank was an unwilling actor
in a drama that began in Mexico. England was the
last Western nation to leave the gold standard during the Great Depression, saving the United States,
and by clinging to the gold standard the United
States put its banking system in mortal danger—a
threat that was only alleviated when Franklin Roosevelt took the country off gold in the 1930s.
Although the conspiracy-minded still see the
Bank of England as a threat, the ascension of New
York over London as the world’s money center in
World War I and the creation of the Federal
Reserve System have to a large degree provided a
new source of conspiracy angst, the Federal
Reserve. Modern conspiracy theorists must carefully weave the Bank of England’s shadowy power
in with the more obvious role played by the Federal Reserve.
Larry Schweikart
See also: Bilderbergers; British Royal Family;
Coughlin, Father Charles; Federal Reserve Bank;
Robertson, Pat; Rockefeller Family; Trilateral
Commission.
References
Anderson, B. L., and P. L. Cottrell. 1974. Money
and Banking in England: The Development of the
Banking System 1694–1914. Vancouver: David
and Charles.
Clapham, John. 1945. The Bank of England: A
History. New York: The Macmillan Company.
Mullins, Eustace. 1993. Secrets of the Federal
Reserve: The London Connection. Staunton, VA:
Bankers Research Institute.
Robertson, Pat. 1991. The New World Order. Dallas,
TX: Word Publishing.
Rough, Gerry. 1988. “More Evidence on the Bank
of England: Parts 1 and 2.” http://www.floodlight.
org.
Still, Bill. 1996. On the Horns of the Beast: The
Federal Reserve and the New World Order.
Winchester, VA: Reinhardt and Still Publishers.

110

Bank of the United States
Seen as an instrument of British interests, the Bank
of the United States (BUS) was the most powerful
single financial institution in the nation, and thus
was the target of those who suspected that foreigners, especially the British, engaged in “shadow control” of the bank. After the First BUS had its charter expire, and was subsequently replaced by the
Second BUS (1816), the new bank became the object of a different conspiracy view in which the
“monied interests” sought control over the “common man” through the Bank.
As part of his Report on Public Credit, Secretary
of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton recommended
creation of a national bank to hold the nation’s
deposits, make loans to the new government of the
United States, and to provide a source of stability
for the nation’s money supply. Based on the model
of the Bank of North America, the Bank of the
United States was chartered by Congress in January 1791 for twenty years with a capital stock of $10
million, of which $2 million was to be paid in gold.
The government subscribed to one-fifth of the capital stock, and the remainder of the Bank’s ownership was in private hands. In addition to holding
government deposits, the BUS had another important advantage over all future privately owned
banks, in that it was authorized to open branches in
several states. Among the cities to obtain BUS
branches were Norfolk, Virginia, Washington,
D.C., and New Orleans. Operations at the main
branch in Philadelphia commenced in 1792.
It took only a few hours on 4 July 1791, for subscribers to snatch up shares of BUS stock. One-third
were members of Congress, and many more were
public officials. Thomas Willing, Robert Morris’s
partner, was the president. Despite the clear and
obvious representation in ownership by powerful
Americans, the Bank immediately came under suspicion of being in the control of “foreign interests.”
These attacks remained particularly acute until
1800, when Thomas Jefferson was elected president. Jefferson, an opponent of the Bank, nevertheless did not ask for repeal of the Bank charter with
his new Republican Congress, nor did his allies

Bank of the United States

A satire on Andrew Jackson’s campaign to destroy the Bank of the United States and its support among state banks.
Jackson (on the left), Martin Van Buren, and Jack Downing struggle against a snake with heads representing the states.
(Library of Congress)

introduce such a bill. Rather, he ordered the sale of
all government interest in the bank, while at the
same time he cut the national debt and thus diminished the Bank’s portfolio of government securities.
For the next several years, the BUS produced
respectable earnings of 8–10 percent for its stockholders, kept a large reserve, and was operated
effectively, if secretly. The Treasury had the
authority to require regular reports, but did not,
and none were offered. This secrecy, combined
with growing anti-British feelings and the corollary
suspicion that British investors controlled large
portions of the stock, placed the recharter of the
BUS in peril in 1811.

By that time, the new president of the United
States, James Madison, who was a former Federalist, found himself in conflict with many of the
Republicans in Congress. Tensions with England
had grown so strong that the recharter bill narrowly
failed in both houses despite support from the (by
then many) state-chartered banks. Soon thereafter,
the United States was again at war with Great
Britain.
Following the War of 1812, banknote circulation
rose from $45 million to $68 million, generated by
some 246 state-chartered private banks. Pressures
on reserves (in which banks had to redeem their
paper banknotes in gold or silver “specie”) mounted

111

Bank War

until, in August 1814, the banks had to “suspend”
specie payments—that is, refuse to pay gold and silver for notes. Secretary of the Treasury Alexander
Dallas, who had supported a new national bank,
used the episode to argue for chartering a Second
Bank of the United States. In January 1815, before
the War of 1812 ended, Congress had passed a new
charter, which Madison vetoed, contending that it
did not meet the government’s needs for loans.
However, Congress redrafted the bill and in
April 1816 submitted a new charter, which was
similar to that of the First BUS. Important differences included a larger capital stock ($35 million)
and there were new locations for branches, but the
operations resembled the earlier bank’s. Like the
First BUS, the headquarters was in Philadelphia,
and like the previous institution, the Second BUS
was 80 percent privately owned. Stephen Girard of
Philadelphia subscribed to $3 million and William
Jones, a Republican from Pennsylvania, was the
first president.
Jones’s leadership proved less than inspiring, and
after the Bank found its liquid draining away, Congress investigated the operations and accused
Jones of mismanagement. After Jones resigned in
1819, South Carolinian Langdon Cheves took over
and immediately began calling in loans. Although a
recession set in, Cheves managed to right the Bank
and to put it on a firm footing, earning a number of
enemies along the way.
Critics who favored “loose money” began to
attack the bank—most notably Senator Thomas
Hart Benton of Missouri, who called it “the monster.” When Cheves was replaced by Philadelphian
Nicholas Biddle in 1923, supporters of the Bank
hoped the criticism would end. Biddle managed
the Bank well—perhaps too well, as the BUS
gained influence and political power far beyond
what the First BUS ever held. By 1828, when Tennessean Andrew Jackson was elected president, he
had a history of antipathy toward banks. Nevertheless, early indications were that he would not act
unfavorably toward the Bank. Biddle, overestimating his own political support and underestimating
Jackson’s popularity, dramatically sought to recharter the BUS in 1832, some four years before its
112

renewal day. He counted on the fact that Jackson
would not risk the wrath of the public in an election year, but badly misjudged Jackson, who saw
the Bank as his main campaign foil. Picking up the
old “monster” tag, and using still other descriptions
such as “the hydra,” Jackson vetoed the recharter
bill and then made the veto stick. Furthermore, the
public supported him.
Central to Jackson’s “war” on the BUS was his
political rhetoric—whether he believed it or not
remains a matter of controversy among historians—that the Bank represented the “elites” and
involved undue foreign control. Jackson’s speeches
touched a long-held U.S. suspicion of speculators
and investors, especially if they were foreigners.
Playing to a British “conspiracy” to control U.S.
financial markets, Jackson succeeded in withdrawing the deposits of the U.S. government from the
BUS in 1833, depriving the Bank of one of its two
primary advantages over other institutions. When
the Bank’s national charter expired, it got a charter
from Pennsylvania, but with none of the power it
once had. By 1840, the former Bank of the United
States was out of business, and subsequent scholars
have failed to identify any substantial foreign control that was exerted over its operations.
Larry Schweikart
See also: Bank War.
References
Remini, Robert V. 1967. Andrew Jackson and the
Bank War: A Study in the Growth of Presidential
Power. New York: Norton.
Schweikart, Larry, ed. 1990. Encyclopedia of
American Business History and Biography:
Banking and Finance to 1913. New York: Facts
on File.
Timberlake, Richard. 1978. The Origins of Central
Banking in the United States. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Bank War
Charges that the Second Bank of the United States
(BUS) had fallen into the hands of “moneyed interests” (an unusual choice of labels, given that it was
a bank) had led to growing hostility and opposition
to the Bank by some Americans during the Jackson

Bank War

era. There were already many who still remembered the panic of 1819 and the severe contraction
initiated by the president of the Second BUS,
Langdon Cheves, in an effort to save the institution. He succeeded by calling in loans and foreclosing on property, then selling the land when
prices returned. Cheves’s efforts, though, alienated
many toward banks altogether. One of those who
blamed banks for his own financial misdealings was
Andrew Jackson, elected president in 1828.
Jackson, the “Hero of New Orleans,” had grown
up with a hatred for the British, suffering a wound
as a teenager from an English officer during the
Revolution. Most of Jackson’s career had taken place
in Tennessee courthouses or on campaigns with the
army against American Indians or British troops. He
thus had orchestrated a strong anti-Washington sentiment in the nation, which he translated into a suspicion of anything big and powerful. In a sense, he
was the first populist president, who saw evil in
moneyed elites, big business, and above all large
financial institutions. Jackson’s understanding of
economics and finances largely came from reading a
book on the South Sea Bubble and from the advice
of William Gouge in his Short History of Paper
Money and Banking in the United States (1833).
Gouge was convinced that paper money was an
intrinsic evil, and that only “hard money,” or a gold
circulating medium, would engender prosperity.
By the time Jackson won the presidency, the
number of banks in the United States had grown
almost geometrically. Under most circumstances, a
bank received its charter (its right to conduct business) from the state legislature after submitting a
petition from citizens explaining the “public good”
such a business would bring to local communities.
Charters at the state level no longer automatically
entailed monopoly status for the bearer, but did
carry important advantages, such as limited liability
and, for banks, the authority to issue paper “notes”
or money. Each bank could (in theory) print notes
in proportion to its paid-in capital, which (again, in
theory) consisted of gold and silver coin, called
“specie.” But banks routinely issued far more notes
than they had specie in their vaults. It was, after all,
how they turned a profit, by issuing the notes in the

form of loans whose repayments exceeded the
small interest they paid on deposits.
Few—especially Jackson—understood banking
as it operated at that time. Banks maintained some
specie reserve, because at any time customers
might demand their notes be “redeemed” in
specie. Any bank that could not redeem its notes
was subject to immediate closure by the state legislature, although few banks were ever required to
shut down, mostly because when one bank was in
trouble, all of them were in trouble, and no legislatures (except Arkansas and Wisconsin, in 1837)
banned banks altogether. What kept the system
running was trust in the bank’s notes, not the actual
gold or silver in the safe. Thus, in an ironic twist,
the healthier a bank, the lower its specie reserves,
while banks that were more suspect to runs would
have to maintain more specie in their vaults.
One exception to this state-governed structure
stood out: the Second Bank of the United States,
which, like its predecessor, had numerous important
advantages over its state-level competitors. As the
depository for the funds of the United States government, the BUS had an enormous deposit base,
which meant that it had far more money to lend than
any other bank. It also was empowered to open
branches in states designated by Congress: the Second BUS had branches in Chillicothe, Ohio, New
Orleans, Louisiana, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, New
York, and so on. The advantages offered by branches
were twofold. First, branches made the bank truly a
national institution. When it came to currency, this
gave it a significant edge, in that, for example, a local
New Orleans bank’s notes might trade “at par” (face
value) in New Orleans and the surrounding area, but
the further one got from the bank, the more difficult
it became to redeem the notes, making them trade
at a “discount.” This was not the case with BUS
money. Since BUS offices were relatively well distributed throughout the country, it was not difficult
to redeem BUS notes in any region. Likewise, the
ubiquity of BUS notes gave them more credibility
and popularity than local banknotes, which added a
premium to their value.
One might think that these advantages over state
banks would have made the BUS an enemy of local
113

Bank War

institutions, and thus fair game for Andrew Jackson’s campaign to destroy it. In reality, however,
most state banks saw the BUS as a source of stability that kept out poorly capitalized or badly run
banks. The BUS could police the system to a
degree, by staging “raids” in which a local BUS
cashier might, in the process of exchange, collect
the notes of a state-chartered bank and then surprise the local bank’s staff by presenting a large
amount of notes for redemption. The local bank
would have to have BUS notes or specie equal to
the amount demanded, or risk charter revocation
by the state legislature. Some have argued that the
discipline brought on by this threat fostered hostility to the BUS by state-chartered banks, but the
large numbers of petitions that came into Congress
by such local banks during the Bank War testify to
the contrary: by and large, local bankers liked the
presence of the BUS.
Within this context, the actual causes of the Bank
War lay in the personalities of Jackson and the president of the Second BUS, Philadelphian Nicholas
Biddle, who had succeeded Cheves. Biddle had
built the BUS into a powerful force, which made it
a prominent target for Jackson. An excellent banker,
Biddle had the support of the most powerful men in
the Senate—Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, and John
Calhoun—but misjudged the popular appeal that
Jackson could muster against an “elite” institution.
Thinking Jackson, in an election year, would not
dare oppose a solid institution that had meant much
to U.S. business, Biddle’s supporters submitted a
recharter bill for the Bank four years before the
charter expired. Where Biddle saw economic reason and common sense, the emotion-driven Jackson
saw an election issue. He vetoed the recharter bill,
calling the Bank a “monster.” Claiming that “The
bank, Mr. Van Buren, is trying to kill me, but I will
kill it,” he railed against “monopolies and exclusive
privileges” (Remini, 16). Playing on popular sentiment against “moneyed men,” Jackson claimed that
Clay, among others, had received BUS loans, while
other Jackson supporters raised the canard used
against the First Bank of the United States that control of the Bank was in the hands of “foreign”
(largely British) investors. Cartoons portrayed Jack114

son as the champion of the common man battling a
many-headed hydra of wealthy-looking men in top
hats.
The stunned Bank forces found that they did not
have the votes to override Jackson’s veto, and while
they were still reeling from that setback, Jackson
delivered another. He withdrew all government
deposits from the Bank, stripping it of its most
important competitive advantage. Jackson stuffed
those funds in state banks whose management was
loyal to him, known as “Pet Banks.” Now a shell,
the BUS could do little, and in 1836, when its
national charter expired, Biddle obtained a charter
from the State of Pennsylvania, only to have the
bank hammered in the panic of 1837, and eventually close.
For more than a century, pundits and historians
accepted that what happened next was the result of
Jackson’s “war.” Land prices shot up, which scholars
attributed to the inflationary issues by the local
banks now unrestrained by the threat of BUS
“raids.” Jackson responded to this inflation by passing the Specie Circular (1836), which required that
all federal land be paid for in specie. This, in turn
(according to the long-held view) caused a crash in
land values and brought on the panic of 1837. The
story was internally consistent, and was generally
accepted by virtually all U.S. historians well into the
1960s. Indeed, Robert Remini’s classic on the affair,
Andrew Jackson and the Bank War, still accepted
this view as late as 1967, even when other evidence
had become available. In the early 1960s, new economics approaches, called econometrics, that used
large data samples manipulated by computers, made
it possible to examine the claims about the BUS and
Jackson’s role with statistical evidence. Richard Timberlake, Jr., and then Peter Temin discovered independently that the inflation had occurred completely apart from the activities of the Bank
War—that Mexican silver imports that formed the
specie reserve in banks had soared in the early
1830s. Likewise, they showed, those silver inflows
dried up quickly by 1836, instigating the panic.
The Bank War made good theater, and enabled
pro-Jackson historians such as Arthur Schlesinger,
Jr., and Robert Remini to create a myth about Jack-

Barruel, Abbé

son fighting for the common man, but it was only
that, a myth. Jackson favored a large central government as much as his predecessor, John Quincy
Adams, but wanted the levers of government in the
hands of the Democrats, not the Whigs or Federalists. He greatly expanded executive power at the
federal level, and his forces in Congress sought to
enact sweeping new laws against currency issue by
any bank. In the end, Jackson did not hate banks,
but only banks that were not under the control of
his party. Nevertheless, the image of a swordwielding Jackson, slashing away at an octopus representing “big business” and “big money,” remains
a popular one to this day.
Larry Schweikart
See also: Bank of the United States.
References
Hummel, Jeffrey Rogers. 1990. “Second Bank of the
United States and the Independent Treasury.” In
The Encyclopedia of American Business History
and Biography: Banking and Finance to 1913, ed.
Larry Schweikart. New York: Facts on File.
Remini, Robert. 1967. Andrew Jackson and the
Bank War. New York: Norton.
Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr. 1945. The Age of Jackson.
Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
Schweikart, Larry. 1988. “Jacksonian Ideology,
Currency Control, and ‘Central’ Banking: A
Reappraisal.” Historian 51 (November): 78–102.
Temin, Peter. 1969. The Jacksonian Economy. New
York: Norton.
Timberlake, Richard H., Jr. 1978. The Origins of
Central Banking in the United States. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

Barruel, Abbé
French ex-Jesuit Abbé Augustin de Barruel (1741–
1820) has the dubious honor of being the father of
modern conspiracy theory. His four-volume Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism contains
all the elements that continue to characterize conspiracy narratives today including “evidence” of a
shadowy cabal orchestrating world events behind
the scenes and “proof” of a direct lineage of malfeasance stretching from antiquity to the present.
According to David Brion Davis, Barruel’s Memoirs
represent the first “rigorous” application of conspir-

acy theories, and as such were highly influential on
his and subsequent generations.
Barruel became a Jesuit in 1756, but by 1762
anti-Jesuit feeling in France had become so strong
he was to leave his homeland to travel for several
years, returning only in 1773 when he left the
church at the time the order was suppressed. The
events of the French Revolution caused him to
take refuge in England in 1792, during which time
he met John Robison, the Scottish scientist whose
Proofs of a Conspiracy would be published the
same year as the first volume of Barruel’s Memoirs
in 1798.
In the Memoirs, Barruel claimed the French
Revolution was brought about intentionally by
secret societies, which included the Jacobins, the
Freemasons, and the Illuminati and Enlightenment thinkers, including Voltaire, Diderot, and the
philosophes. In Barruel’s mind, the antimonarchy,
anticlergy philosophes were the direct descendents
of the secret medieval guilds who made up the
order of the Freemasons. Presenting an accessible
explanation for the causes of the French Revolution, the Memoirs were extremely influential and
were translated into nine languages by 1812; the
French edition remained continuously in print
until 1837.
The first two volumes of the Memoirs lay the
blame for the French Revolution specifically at the
feet of the French Enlightenment thinkers, whose
alarming philosophy espoused, among other things,
a breaking down of national boundaries, overthrowing the monarchy, and establishing a democracy
based on merit. Volumes three and four trace the
historical antecedents for these schools of thought,
finding that the Illuminati ultimately pull the
strings:
The secrets of the Lodges constitute the basis of the
Revolution under the title of the Rights of Man. The
first article declares man to be equal and free; that
the principle of all sovereignty essentially resides in
the people; and that law is nothing more than the
expression of the general will. Such had been for
nearly half a century the doctrines of Argenson,
Montesquieu, Rousseau, and Voltaire. These

115

Barruel, Abbé

principles of pride and revolt had long since been
the ground-work of the mysteries of every class of
Sophister, Occult Mason, or Illuminee; and now
they decorate the title page of the revolutionary
code. (Barruel 1799b, vol. 4: 397)

This fear of Enlightenment thinking struck a particular chord in the nascent United States, where Barruel’s and Robison’s texts were cited as proof,
indeed, of the dangers threatening the new republic.
New England clergyman Rev. Jedidiah Morse was
instrumental in bringing anti-Illuminati feeling into
the political sphere with his series of sermons in
1797–1799, which cited the French Revolution as
proof of the dangers of radical thought, and neatly
aligned Jeffersonian politics with the Illuminati.
Although later Barruel’s position would change,
the first edition of the Memoirs is not antisemitic,
nor does it contain any reference to Judaism; at the
time the Jewish community in France was marginalized, with no political influence, and therefore
was not perceived as a threat. Events after the revolution would change that: the French National
Assembly in 1791 ended legal restrictions on Jews,
which was seen by many as incontestable proof
that, as the revolution directly benefited the Jewish
community, it must have been caused by Jewish
plotting. At this time Barruel’s antisemitic views
had not been published, but such was his profile
and influence that his verbal endorsement of them
was enough to guarantee their acceptance as truth.
Jews began to be seen as the ultimate power
behind all secret societies, leading to the confused
notion that the Freemasons were Jewish (see
Pipes), and, ultimately, to the creation in the early
twentieth century of The Protocols of the Elders of
Zion, the forged document purporting to outline
secret Jewish rituals.
Barruel was not without his detractors, but
responded to his critics using many of the tactics of
later conspiracist thinking. The preface to volume
four defends his position at length, using the very
fact of his critics’ existence as further proof of the
Jacobin/Illumanti plot (an argument along the lines
of “you think that because that’s what the Jacobins
want you to think”); if all else failed, Barruel simply
116

accused his critics of being members of the Illuminati themselves. In a series of letters defending his
position against the philosopher Montesquieu,
Barruel concludes the philosopher is clearly an
Illuminee for disagreeing with him (Barruel
1798–1799a, vol. 4: 409).
Barruel’s text was vastly influential and impossible for his contemporaries to ignore; even his
detractors were forced to take him seriously enough
to refute his arguments at length, and the Memoirs
were written about and discussed by leading literary
and philosophical figures of the day, including
Shelly, Thomas de Quincey and Edmund Burke in
England, and George Sand and Gerard de Nerval
in France. As Pipes states, the book’s combination
of secret societies and antisemitism set the “template” for conspiracy fears that exists to this day.
The book has rarely been out of print, and continues to have its supporters among right-wing conspiracist groups such as the John Birch Society. Its
most recent publishers market the book as an accurate historical document, and describe Barruel as
“one of the few authors on the French Revolution
to be specific in the people he names, the intrigues
he recounts, and the supporting documentation he
provides” (www.amazon.com). However, the last
word should be given to Thomas Jefferson, who, on
reading the book when it was first published, dismissed it as “the ravings of a Bedlamite.”
Lindsay Porter
See also: Freemasonry; Illuminati; Morse, Jedidiah;
Protocols of the Elders of Zion; Robison, John.
References
Barruel, Abbé. 1798–1799a. Memoires pour servir a
l’histoire du Jacobinisme. Vols. 3 and 4. Hamburg:
P. Fauche.
———. 1799b. Memoirs Illustrating the History of
Jacobinism. Vols. 1–4. London. Printed for the
author by T. Burton, sold by E. Booker.
Davis, David Brion, ed. 1971. The Fear of
Conspiracy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Levine, Robert S. 1989. Conspiracy and Romance.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lipset, Seymour Martin, and Earl Raab. 1970. The
Politics of Unreason: Right-wing Extremism in
America, 1790–1970. Vol. 5. Patterns of American
Prejudice Series. New York and London: Harper
and Row.

Bay of Pigs Invasion

McIlhany, William H. 1996. “The Roots of
Subversion.” New American. Vol. 12, No. 20.
http://www.thenewamerican.com/tna/vol12no20/
vol12no20_roots.htm.
Pipes, Daniel. 1997. Conspiracy: How the Paranoid
Style Flourishes and Where It Comes From. New
York: The Free Press.
Roberts, J. M. 1972. The Mythology of the Secret
Societies. London: Secker and Warburg.

Bay of Pigs Invasion
Situated on the southern coast of Cuba, the Bahia
de Cochinos (Bay of Pigs) was the location on 17
April 1961 of a failed invasion of the island by
Cuban exiles hostile to the “Marxist” government
of Fidel Castro, which had taken power in January
1959. The invasion, which was orchestrated by the
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and approved
by President John F. Kennedy, was just one
episode in the broader “conspiracy” to provoke
confrontation with Cuba that had been initiated
under Kennedy’s predecessor, President Dwight
D. Eisenhower, and that continued to operate,
after the Bay of Pigs, through and beyond the
Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962. Intending to raise
support among the islanders and lead a coup
against Castro, the invasion force instead encountered heavy resistance from the Cuban army, and
was defeated within two days. Commentators disagree on the number of casualties involved, but
most accounts agree that around 100 of the Cuban
exiles were killed, and that around 1,200 were
taken prisoner. “Bay of Pigs” quickly became a
byword for the most embarrassing incident in the
history of the U.S. intelligence organizations.
Indeed, in a secret memorandum by Kennedy aide
Richard Goodwin that was made public in 2001,
Goodwin noted a conversation with the Cuban revolutionary Che Guevara, who had thanked him for
the “great political victory” the CIA had handed
the Castro regime.
CIA plans for an invasion of Cuba by anti-Castro
exiles had been under way for some time before
Eisenhower suspended diplomatic relations with
Castro in January 1961. By March 1960 Eisenhower had resolved to overthrow the Cuban gov-

ernment, and had formally endorsed a CIA plan
(“A Program of Covert Action against the Castro
Regime”) whose aim was to oust Castro in such a
manner as to avoid the appearance of U.S. intervention. In keeping with the objectives of the “Program of Covert Action,” the Bay of Pigs invasion
was modeled on a previous coup staged by the CIA
in Guatemala in 1954, where U.S.-led aggression
against the left-wing President Jacobo Arbenz was
presented as the work of disgruntled exiles, and
where U.S. forces made extensive use of radio
propaganda to mobilize local support for the coup.
Despite the acute embarrassment caused by the
Bay of Pigs, the U.S. military and intelligence services followed the failed invasion with an astonishing
set of covert initiatives designed to discredit Castro
and provoke military confrontation with Cuba.
These initiatives, code-named Operation Northwoods, included plans to assassinate Cuban exiles,
attack the U.S. Navy, and commit acts of terrorism
in major U.S. cities, in order to blame the aggression
on Cuba and generate support for military action
against the Castro regime. Operation Northwoods
was formally endorsed by the U.S. Joint Chiefs of
Staff, but was rejected by the Kennedy administration in 1962. Determined to reverse their humiliation at the Bay of Pigs, however, the Joint Chiefs of
Staff continued to plot scenarios (or “pretexts”) that
would justify U.S. action against Cuba. These
included plans to provoke the shooting down of U.S.
spy planes over Cuban air space, the possibility of
stimulating a Cuban attack on U.S. forces stationed
on the island at the Guantanamo Bay naval base, and
forcing other Latin American countries into armed
confrontation with Castro.
The Bay of Pigs and the
Assassination of JFK
The Bay of Pigs has been linked with two of the
most momentous U.S. conspiracy theories of the
twentieth century: the conspiracy (or multiple conspiracies) to assassinate President John F. Kennedy,
and the Watergate conspiracy, which would lead to
the resignation of President Richard Nixon in 1974.
Among the CIA operatives who helped plan the Bay
of Pigs was E. Howard Hunt, who would later be
117

Bay of Pigs Invasion

Watched by armed guards, grim-faced invaders are marched off to prison from temporary quarters at Giron Beach, Las
Villas province, after their capture by Castro forces. (Bettmann/Corbis)

sentenced to thirty-five years in prison for his part in
the break-in at the offices of the Democratic
National Committee in the Watergate building. In
the early days of the Watergate investigation, Hunt’s
involvement, and rumors that the break-in was
staged by anti-Castro Cubans monitoring the “proCastro” stance of candidates for the Democratic
presidential nomination, led to links being established in some conspiracy theories between the Bay
of Pigs and Watergate.
More enduring links have been explored
between the Bay of Pigs and the Kennedy assassination. Although Kennedy followed Eisenhower in
approving plans for the invasion of Cuba, his reluctance to deploy U.S. air-power in support of the
operation made him enemies in the military and

118

the CIA, where his caution, and his desire to avoid
implicating the United States in the attack, were
seen as the principal factors behind the dismal failure of the mission. One conspiracy theory about
the Kennedy assassination, a version famously
played out in Don DeLillo’s novel Libra and Oliver
Stone’s movie JFK, suggests that Kennedy was
killed by the CIA and/or by anti-Castro exiles, who
were resentful of the manner in which the president had dealt with the Cuban issue during and
after the Bay of Pigs invasion. Another version
views Kennedy’s assassination as a revenge-killing
carried out by agents of the Castro regime in
response to the attempted invasion of their island
and the numerous U.S. plots to kill Castro.
David Holloway

Beam, Louis

See also: Castro, Fidel; Central Intelligence
Agency; Cold War; Cuban Missile Crisis; Kennedy,
John F., Assassination of; Liddy, G. Gordon; Nixon,
Richard; Pentagon Papers; Red Scare; Stone, Oliver;
Warren Commission.
References
Bamford, James. 2002. Body of Secrets: Anatomy of
the Ultra Secret National Security Agency. New
York: Anchor Books.
Blight, James G., and Peter Kornbluh, eds. 1998.
Politics of Illusion: The Bay of Pigs Invasion Reexamined. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner
Publishers.
Kornbluh, Peter, ed. 1998. Bay of Pigs Declassified:
The Secret CIA Report on the Invasion of Cuba.
New York: New Press.

Beam, Louis
Louis Beam first came to public attention in 1981
during a conflict between white and Vietnamese
fishermen in Galveston Bay, Texas. The Texas
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, led by Beam, became
involved in the conflict and, following a court case
in which the Klan was instructed to cease harassing
the Vietnamese, Beam became increasingly active
nationally as an advocate of what he described as
the “Fifth Era Klan.” The most recent period of
Klan activity, which Beam defined as the fourth
era, had failed, he argued, because its leaders did
not understand that the only hope of bringing
about racial victory was to abandon the idea of a
mass movement and return to its roots as an armed
underground organization. Beam’s writings on the
subject, which included the outline of a points system to be awarded depending on the importance
of the individual assassinated, raised his profile
within the extreme Right and in the late 1980s he
was among those tried unsuccessfully for seditious
conspiracy in Fort Smith, Arkansas. He continued,
however, to espouse the need for political violence
and in 1992, in the final issue of his magazine, The
Seditionist, published what would prove to be his
most important article, “Leaderless Resistance.”
The article argued that the only way to defeat the
federal government was to avoid centralized organizations as these were easily infiltrated. Instead mili-

tants should return to the approach pioneered in the
original American Revolution, in which the committees of correspondence that had organized resistance
to the British had functioned as independent cells. A
second American Revolution would once again need
to take up leaderless resistance. Coming as it did
immediately before the killing of Christian Identity
believer Vicki Weaver by an FBI sniper, the article
was the subject of discussion at a gathering of “Christian men” organized by Identity leader Pete Peters
later in the year. In 1993, Beam, himself an Identity
adherent, was at Waco, Texas, during the FBI siege
of the Branch Davidian religious community that
culminated in the burning to death of over seventy
adults and children. Two subsequent events were to
raise Beam’s profile still further. First, following the
emergence of the citizen militias in 1994, his article
on leaderless resistance began to enjoy an increased
circulation. More importantly, the bombing of a federal building in Oklahoma the following year led to
the claim that it had been the result of a conspiracy
involving a group following Beam’s strategy. This
claim was not only made by critics of the militias but
also circulated among sections of the Patriot movement. Beam himself, however, saw the most likely
explanation of the Oklahoma bombing in the same
light as did many Patriots, as a federal government
conspiracy intended to crush opposition and bring
about a police state.
An early exponent of the notion of a Zionist
Occupation Government, Beam told the court during the Fort Smith trial that his writings had been
intended to expose the conspiracy that controlled
the United States. Writing in the 1990s, he claimed
that multiculturalism was being used by the same
bankers who had sponsored the Bolshevik Revolution in order to destroy national identity and create
a New World Order. Despite ill-health and suggestions that he has become less committed to antisemitism, he has continued to be active, and in
1999 declared his support for antiglobalization protesters at Seattle. New alliances, he predicted,
would form between those who had described
themselves as conservatives and those who had seen
themselves as progressives. “The New American

119

Bell, Art

Patriot will be neither left nor right, just a freeman
fighting for liberty.”
Martin Durham
See also: Antisemitism; Christian Identity; Ku Klux
Klan; Militias; New World Order; Oklahoma City
Bombing; Waco
References
Dees, Morris, with James Corcoran. 1996.
Gathering Storm. America’s Militia Threat. New
York: HarperCollins.
Stanton, Bill. 1991. Klanwatch. Bringing the Ku
Klux Klan to Justice. New York: Mentor.
Websites
Anti-Defamation League: http://www.adl.org/
learn/ext_us/beam.asp.
Jubilee Newspaper: http://www.jubileenewspaper.com/beam.96.htm.
Louis Beam: http://www.louisbeam.com.

Bell, Art
Art Bell’s late-night radio talk-show Coast to Coast
AM is the most popular of the late night shows on
the radio and has been ranked the fourth most
popular of all radio shows in the United States. Its
recurring themes are the paranormal, weather and
earth changes, UFOs and alien abductions, and
governmental attempts to hide the truth about
extraterrestrial visits and NASA explorations from
the public. Bell, whose politics are Libertarian
rather than right-wing Republican, rarely engages
in political discussions that are not associated with
the show’s main focus.
Bell, who was born 17 June 1945, in Jacksonville,
North Carolina, has spent almost his entire career
in radio. In his early years he was a rock music disk
jockey who in 1978 became the host of a late-night
talk-show called West Coast AM on KDWN in Las
Vegas, Nevada. In 1988 Bell, with the help of Alan
Corbeth, renamed the show Coast to Coast AM
and syndicated it through the Chancellor Broadcasting Company, moving its broadcast from the
Plaza Hotel in Las Vegas to his home in Pahrump,
Nevada. Coast to Coast AM, which began with a
total of 17 radio stations located in the western
United States, now has over 500 affiliates in the
120

United States and Canada and an estimated audience of 10 million listeners.
Bell’s most well-known conspiracy theorist guest
is Richard C. Hoagland, who claims that NASA has
an entirely secret alternative research agenda kept
hidden from the citizens of the United States, and
that NASA has fought to prevent the world knowing about an earlier presence of life on Mars. Other
frequent guests include Kathleen Keating, who
claims to know the identity of the Antichrist and
predicts that a coup in the Vatican will unseat Pope
John Paul II, and Major Ed Dames, a proponent of
remote viewing who has proposed a myriad of
secret schemes and cover-ups. Writer Whitley
Strieber, the author of the alien abduction narrative Communion, who believes that UFO witnesses
are being silenced by various means, was also a frequent guest before taking over Bell’s other radio
show, Dreamland. Area 51, the government base
that remains cloaked in secrecy, is located very
close to Bell’s home and is also a favorite topic for
the show. Bell’s show airs from 1 A.M. to 6 A.M.,
Eastern Standard Time, and he typically allows his
guests a great deal of freedom to propound their
ideas before soliciting callers to question them.
Coast to Coast AM was implicated in the suicide
of the thirty-nine members of the Heaven’s Gate
cult in 1997 when an amateur astronomer informed Bell’s audience that a vehicle was flying
behind the Hale-Bopp comet; this claim was validated on the air by Dr. Courtney Brown, a proponent of the reputed psychic phenomenon of
“remote viewing.” Although the Heaven’s Gate cult
denied this connection to their actions and Bell revealed that Brown had used incorrect evidence for
his statement, the media continued to link Bell’s
show with the tragedy.
Art Bell’s personal and professional life has also
been the source of speculation and conspiracy theory. In October 1998 he announced he was leaving
Coast to Coast AM permanently but returned
weeks later, refusing to reveal the reason for his
absence. The media subsequently reported his
son’s molestation by an HIV-positive teacher in
Nye County, Nevada, an event that led to Bell’s
retirement in April 2000 when he sued a Nashville,

Berg, Alan

Tennessee, short-wave radio station for broadcasting slanderous information that he was a child
molester. After this suit was settled he returned to
Coast to Coast AM in February 2001.
Bell is the author of four books, The Art of Talk
(1995), The Quickening (1997), The Source (with
Brad Steiger) (1999), and The Coming Global
Superstorm (with Whitley Strieber) (1999), and
publishes a monthly magazine called After Dark
that presents issues discussed on his program. He
has been interviewed on a number of television
programs, including The Today Show and Larry
King Live, and has been featured on an episode of
Dark Skies, a show about the governmental coverup of extraterrestrial life on earth, and on Millennium, when he played himself.
Angela Hague
See also: Area 51; Moon Landings; UFOs.

Berg, Alan
On 18 June 1984, controversial Jewish radio talkshow host Alan Berg was assassinated in the driveway of his Denver home. Berg’s belligerent, confrontational style was carried by Denver’s KOA
radio and reached thirty-eight states during the
evening hours. The eclectic range of topics
included subjects such as gun control, homosexuality, race relations, and Christianity. Always willing
to enrage the caller as well as his listeners, Berg
became one of the most popular radio personalities
in the country. He also became one of the most
hated men in the country by the conspiratorial
white supremacist movement.
In the spring of 1984, a militant subgroup of the
Aryan Nation led by Robert Mathews, known as
the Order or the Silent Brotherhood, began what it
referred to as “Step 5,” a code name for its assassination hit list. The list began with Morris Dees of
the Southern Poverty Law Center, followed by
Norman Lear, the liberal television producer, and
then Alan Berg. Berg’s radio show gave him a
nightly platform to belittle Aryan Nation and its
cause, and thus made him a prime target.

On 18 June Berg recorded a radio show questioning the pope’s comment that sex for pleasure is sinful. Berg argued that nothing in the Bible supported
this claim, and although he purposely misinterpreted
the pope’s statement, he used it as the basis for an
hour-long attack on Catholics and the pope in his
usual controversial style. During the show, Mathews
and his men arrived in Denver.
Weeks earlier, Mathews had sent one of the few
women he trusted to KOA radio station under the
pretext of writing a college paper. While there, she
acquired information on Berg’s appearance, his
schedule, what type of car he drove, where he
parked, and where he lived. The plan was simple:
ambush Berg at his home.
Mathews and two of his followers, David Lane
and Bruce Pierce, parked across the street from
Berg’s home and waited for him to return. At
approximately 9:20 P.M., Berg pulled his VW Beetle into his driveway. As he was getting out of the
car, Lane pulled in behind Berg’s car, blocking him
in. Mathews opened the rear door for Pierce, who
opened fire with a .45-caliber MAC 10, killing
Berg. Mathews and Pierce jumped back into their
car and Lane sped down the street.
In December 1984, after a massive manhunt,
the FBI cornered Mathews in a house on Whidbey
Island, off the coast of Washington. After a two-day
standoff the FBI fired an M-79 Starburst in the
house, causing a fire. Defiantly, Mathews remained
in the burning house firing his gun until he succumbed to the flames. The other members of the
Order were eventually captured and in November
1987 David Lane and Bruce Pierce were found
guilty of the murder of Alan Berg and sentenced to
150 years in prison.
Kenneth L. Mullen
See also: Aryan Nations.
References
Dees, Morris, with James Corcoran. 1996.
Gathering Storm: America’s Militia Threat. New
York: HarperCollins.
Flynn, Kevin, and Gary Gerhardt. 1989. The Silent
Brotherhood. New York: The Free Press.
George, John, and Laird Wilcox. 1996. American
Extremists: Militias, Supremacists, Klansmen,

121

Biddle, Nicholas

Communists, and Others. Amhurst, NY:
Prometheus Books.
Singular, Stephen. 1989. Talked to Death: The
Murder of Alan Berg and the Rise of the NeoNazis. New York: Berkley Books.

Biddle, Nicholas
As director of the Second Bank of the United States,
and proponent of a centralized financial system for
the United States, Nicholas Biddle (1786–1844) was
the target of accusations that he led a conspiracy of
wealthy aristocrats to control the national economy.
Biddle, born in Philadelphia in 1786, was everything
that President Andrew Jackson considered dangerous—a graduate of Princeton, editor of a literary
journal and of several volumes of the journals of the
Lewis and Clark expedition, and, as a young man, a
secretary to the U.S diplomatic mission to czarist
Russia. All of Biddle’s experiences, especially exposure to the economic chaos of early-nineteenth-century Russia, and the vast infrastructure demanded
by the opening of the American West, led him to
believe that the United States needed the strength
of a central bank.
Biddle, who had been on the board of directors
since 1819, took control of the bank in 1823. From
its chartering in 1816, the Second Bank was mired
in controversy, sparking the Supreme Court case
McCulloch vs. Maryland, in which Congress was
shown to have the legal power to charter the institution. The economic panic of 1819, while not
caused by the establishment of the bank, was
largely blamed on the bank by unhappy small farmers, westerners, and supporters of state banks. Biddle believed that the bank’s director should be apolitical, but when opposition to his institution surged
he sought allies in Congress, including Daniel
Webster and Henry Clay. Biddle and his supporters agreed that the nation needed ready access to
funds capable of supporting large-scale military
actions, like that waged in the War of 1812, and
favored strict regulation of state banks.
Knowing that 1832 was a critical election year,
Biddle asked Andrew Jackson to renew the bank’s
charter, although it would not expire until 1836.
122

Portrait of Nicholas Biddle, president of the Bank of the
United States from 1822 to 1839. (Corbis)

Bank supporters counted on election campaigning
to force Jackson into signing, so that he would not
lose support in states that benefited from the bank,
such as Pennsylvania, where the bank had its headquarters. Instead of seeing this as an economic
opportunity for the nation, Jackson interpreted the
request as a threat from the bank against presidential power. As a champion of the “people,” Jackson
leapt at the chance to attack an unpopular institution that many small farmers and frontier people
thought limited their economic opportunities and
was thought to be dominated by eastern, elitist conspirators who sought to profit for themselves. After
Congress passed a bill that would recharter the Second Bank of the United States, Jackson vetoed it,
citing a vast conspiracy of old-money interests acting against the common voters of the nation.
When Jackson won reelection, Biddle and his followers were unable to summon enough votes to
override the veto, and launched into a plan to force

Bilderbergers

the government to recognize the value of the bank.
Biddle instructed the bank’s branches not to curtail
making loans, an action that caused an economic
slump in 1834. Jackson hit back by ordering his acting secretary of the treasury, Roger Taney, to withdraw federal deposits from the bank and place them
in state “pet” banks. Two previous secretaries had
refused this order, and Jackson dismissed and
replaced them, finally finding an obedient servant in
Taney. Biddle mustered congressional support for a
censure of the president on the ground that he was
obliged by the bank’s charter to deposit federal
funds, and the Senate refused to confirm Taney as
the official secretary of the treasury. The charter ran
out in 1836, shutting down national bank operation
(it continued its existence as the State Bank of Pennsylvania), and Biddle retired in defeat to his estate,
Andalusia, where he channeled his interests into
breeding race horses, Guernsey cattle, and grapes.
Biddle lost the “Bank War” to Andrew Jackson,
and his own network of support could not match
the power of the executive branch of the government, especially when Jackson campaigned by
accusing the wealthy and educated Biddle of subverting the financial infrastructure of the government against the common man. However, Biddle
took no pleasure in the subsequent economic crisis, the panic of 1837, created by uncontrolled
paper money issued by the state banks, and he died
in 1844, still championing the cause of a centralized monetary system.
Margaret Sankey
See also: Bank of the United States; Bank War;
Jackson, Andrew.
References
Govan, Thomas Payne. 1959. Nicholas Biddle:
Nationalist and Public Banker 1786–1844.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Remini, Robert Vincent. 1967. Andrew Jackson and
the Bank War: A Study in the Growth of
Presidential Power. New York: Norton.
Taylor, George Rogers. 1949. Jackson vs. Biddle: The
Struggle over the Second Bank of the United
States. Boston, MA: Heath.
Wilburn, Jean Alexander. 1967. Biddle’s Bank: The
Crucial Years. New York: Columbia University
Press.

Bilderbergers
Named after the Bilderberg Hotel in Oosterbeek,
Holland, where the first meeting took place in May
1954, the Bilderbergers form an unofficial, secretive group set up in the first years of the cold war
to foster communication and cooperation between
Europe and the United States. Leading businessmen and political figures hoped to further the aims
of liberal democratic capitalism, protecting it from
what they saw as communism’s imperialist aspirations. Critics who accuse the Bilderbergers of conspiracy claim the group constitutes an invisible,
shadow government, and that this secret government’s goals involve the destruction of the nationstate, the creation of a single currency, and the
foundation of a New World Order led by a single
world-government.
Reference to “the Bilderbergers” generally means
those who have attended at least one of the meetings, but there is no set list of members as such.
Rather, the group’s steering committee (including
figures such as the former U.S. secretary of state
Henry Kissinger and Canadian media-mogul Conrad Black) is in charge of deciding who will attend
the meeting in any given year. The list of those who
have attended Bilderberger meetings is impressive,
including leading politicians and military figures,
businessmen and bankers, and lawyers and academics (see www.bilderberg.org for complete lists). The
first meeting was not only attended by high-ranking
CIA officials, but was financed in part by the CIA as
well. Also, which is important for a certain strain of
anti–old world conspiracy theory, the group allowed
members of Western European royal families to
reclaim the political power they had abdicated
through constitutional reform.
The Bilderbergers claim that their limitation of
press coverage and overall secrecy is necessary in
order to ensure an environment of openness and
freedom of speech during the meetings. In this age
of media proliferation, it is truly stunning that they
manage to retain such a low profile, with nearly
none of the members ever agreeing to be interviewed on the subject of the meetings. Many antiBilderbergers see this high level of secrecy as sure
evidence of a conspiracy.
123

Black Helicopters

In the minds of some, further evidence of conspiracy can be found in the Bilderbergers’ ties to the
Council on Foreign Relations (CFR)—an extremely
high percentage of U.S. Bilderbergers are also
members of the CFR—and to the Trilateral Commission, which was founded from within the Bilderberg meetings by David Rockefeller (Gill, 137).
Even mainstream writers often suggest that U.S.
Bilderbergers may well be contravening the Logan
Act, which makes it illegal for U.S. citizens to negotiate with foreign powers without being granted the
authority to do so by the U.S. government.
Many argue that future heads of state are handpicked by the Bilderbergers. It is no coincidence,
they charge, that Bill Clinton attended the 1991
meeting and went on to become president the following year, or that Tony Blair attended in1993 and
became the Labour Party’s leader a year later, ultimately becoming Britain’s prime minister in the
1997 election. Furthermore, the policies made by
the parties of the left in both Britain and the United
States during the 1990s—policies that proved highly
successful in capturing “moderate” voters—seem to
be in line with the policies of the Bilderberger
group, particularly those that favor the promotion of
economic globalization (i.e., the New World Order).
When faced with the impressive list of attendees, no one would dispute the fact that the Bilderbergers wield immense political and economic
power; the question is, rather, whether or not this
obvious power is best described as a conspiracy or
secret world government. The forces of international capitalism are indeed powerful, and, as even
mainstream theorists have argued, the forces of
globalization create interconnected networks of
power that operate just the way a conspiracy to create a New World Order would (see, for example,
Michael Hardt and Antonia Negri’s book, Empire).
Furthermore, by their own admission, the Bilderbergers are out to promote the advance of global
capitalism. So it is fair to ask exactly what makes
anti-Bilderbergers “merely” conspiracy theorists.
For many, anti-Bilderbergers are designated conspiracy theorists because of their reliance on an array
of concepts, rhetorical figures, and, perhaps most
importantly, targets that are often to be found in
124

other “extremist” theories. As with other conspiracy
theories, anti-Bilderberger rhetoric focuses on an
international cabal run by the Rockefellers and the
Rothschilds, and many would argue that the choice
of these two families as targets is no accident. Critics
of these “international bankers” and “secret governments” tend to draw their metaphors, figures, and
arguments from a vast conceptual reservoir that
includes, among other things, attacks on the so-called
Jewish-Masonic world conspiracy. Whether or not
anti-Bilderberger writings are manifestly antisemitic
groups highly attuned to the language of antsemitism
(such as the Anti-Defamation League) often detect
antisemitism in certain code words (i.e., the Rothschilds, “international bankers,” etc.). When labeled
antisemitic by the Anti-Defamation League (ADL),
the conspiracy theorists ask: if there were a conspiracy of international bankers that was orchestrating
world events, how on earth are we to investigate it
and critique it other than by using terms such as
“international bankers”? In the eyes of the antiBilderbergers, the ADL may be unwittingly (or wittingly) playing into the hands of the Bilderbergers.
Yet in the very virulence of their attacks on the ADL
and international Jewish bankers, the right-wing antiBilderbergers often seem to betray their true intentions (see www.bilderberg.org/jewish.htm).
Marlon Kuzmick
See also: Council on Foreign Relations; New World
Order; One-World Government; Trilateral
Commission.
References
Gill, Stephen. 1990. American Hegemony and the
Trilateral Commission. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Hardt, Michael, and Antonia Negri. 2000. Empire.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ronson, Jon. 2001. Them. London: Picador.
Websites
Bilderbergers (site by Tony Gosling): http://www.
bilderberg.org.
Nexus Magazine: http://www.nexusmagazine.com/
bilderbergers.html.

Black Helicopters
The “black helicopter” came to public prominence
as part of the conspiracy theories of a New World

Black Helicopters

Order, which were much reported upon as the core
belief of the U.S. militia movement that rapidly
arose in the western United States in the early
1990s. Stories of unidentified black helicopters
seen flying over rural areas and accounts of menacing encounters with the craft and their occupants
were soon being incorporated into the unfolding
narrative of a monster plot involving the federal
government and the imminent takeover of the
United States by the United Nations. The conspiracy website Parascope invited people to report
sightings of black helicopters; a typical example
(from “Nighthawk” dated August 1996) read: “Our
Texas Air Guard flys [sic] very dark green copters
with no markings on them and they look black from
a distance. I believe they are up to no good. Why
are they unmarked? They also have some in Montgomery county to the North of here which used
Infer-red scans to search for missing people among
other things.” The alleged sightings were numerous enough by 1994 that the popular conspiracy
author Jim Keith compiled a book called Black
Helicopters over America; his thesis was revealed
by its subtitle: Strikeforce for the New World
Order. Before long, the black helicopter became
synonymous with crackpot conspiracy beliefs, and
sightings were familiar enough to be parodied in
satirical TV shows such as South Park and King of
the Hill.
However, to understand the phenomenon it has
to be noted that the helicopter’s potential as a platform for surveillance (and firepower) is genuine,
and had already been amply demonstrated in the
Vietnam War. After the war the same potential was
deployed at home by U.S. police forces (with the
color of helicopters changing from olive to blue)
and, as Mike Davis notes in City of Quartz, the
1980s saw the urban ghettos of the United States
progressively becoming “Vietnamized.” Therefore,
to imagine the helicopter as an agent of malign
state power is based on real foundations, if ones
rarely experienced by white citizens. Nevertheless,
the militias were not the first rural Americans to
claim such sightings. The initial sightings were
made in the early 1970s, again in the West, by
ranchers, and formed part of their claim that

strange wounds found on dead cattle were the
result of the secret testing of bioweapons by the
military. Helicopters seen overhead were quickly
associated with this, and soon it was alleged that to
do their deeds they masqueraded as UFOs at
night. Before long this became inverted and some
argued that the mutilations (or “mutes”) were genuinely of extraterrestrial origin—the staunchest
advocate being Linda Moulton Howe, author of
Alien Harvest. As a result, the sightings soon were
plugged into the rich mix of conspiracy beliefs
already holding sway in 1980s U.S. ufology. As
Curtis Peeples put it, it was soon established
among advocates that there existed “an immense
conspiracy theory [including] not only UFOs and
mutes, but the Kennedy assassinations, exotic test
aircraft, secret treaties, underground cities, international bankers, shadowy ‘whistle blowers’ and
the Jews” (Peeples, 224).
Clearly, then, the sightings of the 1990s inherited much from the first generation, but what of
the core constituents of the phenomenon and their
meaning? Why black? Black is now the color of
covert authority favored by special units, and in the
national security lexicon it also attaches to budgets
and projects so very secret they aren’t even
acknowledged to exist, for instance as was true for
years of the Stealth fighter and bomber. Why rural
locations, and what was being seen (for both generations)? Some of the sightings were obviously
misidentifications of civilian helicopters (all silhouettes seeming black), but it does appear likely that
some were of genuinely unmarked aircraft operated by the Drug Enforcement Agency, on the
prowl for backwoods marijuana plantations. However, as Nighthawk’s mundane sighting shows, others were likely of military vehicles (actually gray)
engaged in training, and in the imagination of the
militias a recursion typical of conspiracy theory can
be seen: the military have to train in rural areas;
the militias are a rural movement believing in a
conspiracy involving the government and military;
thus the presence of helicopters in rural areas
proves that the military are up to no good and are
even targeting the militias. The prominence of the
black helicopter perhaps therefore represents an
125

Black Panthers

imaginative inversion of an oppressive reality that
inner-city African Americans genuinely experience—a “wannabe victimization” that seeks to recenter the rural and marginalized.
However, like much militia belief, this stance
was prompted by the events at Ruby Ridge and
Waco, during which many FBI, Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, and Firearms, and military helicopters
were seen, which led to further militia actions that
then stimulated antiterrorist responses from these
agencies. It is a fact that special units do exist and
train with helicopters for domestic action, as recent
exercises and the use of military helicopters in border patrols have shown. Notably, though, a divide
exists between those believers who claim that the
black helicopters are from real covert units such as
the army’s 160th Special Aviation Regiment and
those who consider them to be the inherently
unidentifiable agents of the United Nations—or
worse. Ultimately, then, to see the black helicopter
is to enter a world where the potential capabilities
of a real technology are being extrapolated, and
where the actual (and sometimes necessarily
secret) activities of the military are fantasized
about in a framework that imagines their focus is
on Americans. Thus, it seems likely that after September 11 and with the context of “homeland security” the black helicopter will keep and even gain
an audience.
Alasdair Spark

See also: Cattle Mutilations; Militias; New World
Order.
References
Davis, Mike. 1990. City of Quartz: Excavating the
Future in Los Angeles. London: Vintage.
Howe, Linda Moulton. 1989. An Alien Harvest. n.p.:
Howe Productions.
Keith, Jim. 1994. Black Helicopters over America:
Strikeforce for the New World Order. Georgia:
Illuminet Press.
Peeples, Curtis. 1990. Watch the Skies. Washington,
DC: Smithsonian Institution.
Spark, Alasdair. 1998. “Flight Controls: The Social
History of the Helicopter as a Symbol of
Vietnam.” In Vietnam Images, ed. Jeff Walsh and
Jim Aulich. London: MacMillan.

126

———. 1998. “Are There Black Helicopters over
Your House?” Thresholds: Viewing Culture. Vol.
11.

Black Panthers
A militant black activist organization established in
the 1960s, the Black Panther Party put forward an
analysis of institutional racism in the United States
that had conspiratorial overtones, while at the same
time it was the subject of conspiracy theories told
by white conservatives who feared that the party
constituted an armed conspiracy against U.S. institutions.
Huey P. Newton and Bobby Seale founded the
Black Panther Party (BPP) in 1966 in North Oakland, California. In the aftermath of the recent
uprisings in Watts, Harlem, Chicago, and Detroit,
Newton and Seale had come to question the effectiveness of the civil rights movement. Examining
the situation in their own backyard—an exodus of
manufacturing jobs to the Oakland suburbs and
even overseas (replaced by jobs in the commerce
and finance sectors that required high levels of
education and skill) and a shortage of affordable
housing (from 1955 to the early 1960s, over 7,000
low-income housing units were destroyed, and few
of them were replaced)—they began to believe
that the movement was not properly addressing
these issues of economic change and inequality and
thus questioned how best to proceed.
For many black nationalists, the answer to this
query was a call for racial separatism, while traditional liberals continued to press for greater integration and the passage of new legal civil rights
guarantees. It was within this volatile ideological
milieu that the BPP called for “revolutionary intercommunalism” (Newton, 9), a distinctively “socialist and Marxist” (Newton, 27) ideology that rejected
both the concept of separatism as well as the gradualism that accompanied liberal calls for change,
and placed the civil rights struggle in a more global
context. Stating that since the United States was no
longer a nation but an empire, they argued that the
sovereignty of all countries had been called into
question. “Their self-determination, economic

Black Panthers

determination, and cultural determination,” Newton explained, “has been transformed by the imperialists and the ruling cycle.” These transformations
and phenomena required the Panthers to call themselves “intercommunalists” (rather than “internationalists”) because “nations have been transformed
into communities of the world” (Newton, 29). Such
a focus led to attention on the inequities of capitalism on the local level, as the Panthers saw African
American neighborhoods as such communities
within the U.S. empire. Party members established
armed police patrols (which the Panthers are perhaps best known for), free breakfast programs for
children, health clinics, escort and transportation
services for senior citizen housing project residents,
and clothing and shoe programs for community
members across the country. These programs were
seen as explicitly protecting the community from
the dangers of imperialism, providing a local wall of
self-defense against the larger forces that maintained the U.S. empire.
As one might expect, such a sweeping ideology
lent itself to conspiracy theory, particularly as the
BPP continued to face hostility from the very forces
it wished to overthrow. By 1970, the BPP was referring to the United States as “a barbaric organization
controlled and operated by avaricious, sadistic,
bloodthirsty thieves” (qtd. in Foner, 268). There
was, as the New York Black Panthers explained, a
“Government Conspiracy” (qtd. in Foner, 208) that
sought to eliminate all of those who dared to question the inhuman capitalistic system. Not surprisingly, it was those institutions that the Panthers
interacted with on the local level that were most
often implicated in these conspiratorial theories.
Police officers and court officials were tangible
symbols of “the most ruthless system in the world,”
a system that attempted to cover up instances of
cruelty, inequality, and outright brutality through
the propagation of the “big lie” of U.S. freedom and
equality. Such actions showed that “[t]he
‘Amerikkan system of justice’ is a hideous sham and
a revolting farce” (qtd. in Foner, 203). In the face of
such a wide-ranging conspiracy, the Panthers felt
that they had little choice but to topple these institutions wholesale.

Eldridge Cleaver led a life of transformations: youthful
years of crime and imprisonment; a decade as a famous
African American activist and writer; a period of exile;
and his last years as an outspoken and conservative
Christian. (Library of Congress)

Yet there was strong evidence to support the Panthers’ turn to conspiracy thinking, primarily in the
shape of the governmental response to the party.
Seeing the Panthers themselves as leaders of a grand
conspiracy against the United States government,
such organizations as the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA),
the Justice Department, and even the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) launched an assault on the Panthers that would be enough to make any group fall
victim to paranoia. On 8 September 1968, FBI
Director J. Edgar Hoover announced that the Black
Panther Party was “the greatest threat to the internal
security of the country,” and called for the bureau to
“expose, disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise
neutralize” the BPP (Newton, 1; 9). By June 1969 the
FBI was investigating all forty-two Panther chapters
127

Booth, John Wilkes

and approximately 1,200 members and sympathizers
in order “to obtain evidence of possible violation of
federal and local laws.” This effort included the
examination of every aspect of Panther affairs, from
financial records to the publication of Black Panther
newsletters and flyers. The FBI even conducted a
survey to determine “how many members are on
welfare” (O’Reilly, 298). The Panthers also found
themselves the target of numerous COINTELPRO (the
infamous FBI counterintelligence program) investigations. Of the 295 documented actions taken by
COINTELPRO to disrupt African American groups, 233
were specifically directed toward destruction of the
Party (Newton, 53). And when such covert counterintelligence programs could not fully curtail the
activities of the BPP, the government had little trouble resorting to overt violence, as seen in the 1969
murder of Chicago Black Panther Fred Hampton, at
the hands of the FBI and the Chicago police force
(Jones, 372–373).
Such acts of violence and intimidation weakened
the infrastructure of the BPP across the country,
and the party, by the early 1980s, ceased to be a
vital political force on the national scene. However,
the party left a legacy that, throughout the 1970s,
1980s, and even 1990s, influenced such groups and
individuals as the white radical Weathermen, the
Philadelphia-based MOVE organization, and even
academics and students who called upon their universities to institute black studies programs and
departments. Perhaps most important, the BPP, by
calling attention to the government-mandated
attacks against it, made it clear that it was not only
outsider groups that relied heavily on conspiracy
thinking. Such thinking was now something practiced by our own government, a revelation that led
many U.S. citizens to take a more cynical and pessimistic view of the U.S. state.
Michael H. Carriere
See also: Central Intelligence Agency; COINTELPRO;
Federal Bureau of Investigation; Hoover, J. Edgar;
Income Tax and the Internal Revenue Service;
Weathermen.
References
Foner, Philip S., ed. 1970. The Black Panthers Speak.
Philadelphia, PA: J. B. Lippincott Company.

128

Jones, Charles E., ed. 1998. The Black Panther
Party: Reconsidered. Baltimore, MD: Black
Classic Press.
Newton, Huey. 1996. War against the Panthers: A
Study of Repression in America. New York:
Harlem River Press.
O’Reilly, Kenneth. 1989. “Racial Matters”: The FBI’s
Secret File on Black America. New York: The
Free Press.
Smith, Jennifer B. 1999. An International History of
the Black Panther Party. New York: Garland
Publishing Company.

Booth, John Wilkes
The legend surrounding President Abraham Lincoln’s assassin, John Wilkes Booth, was that Booth
was not killed on the Garrett farmstead in northern
Virginia in 1865 as is commonly believed, but that
he eluded his pursuers and lived on as a fugitive for
decades afterwards. Belief in John Wilkes Booth’s
escape implicitly asserts a government cover-up
and as such it has been tied to various conspiracy
theories surrounding Lincoln’s assassination.
Despite the best efforts of official and selfappointed historical custodians to dismiss the story
as trivial nonsense, it keeps resurfacing. The most
recent episode occurred in the 1990s when a group
led by an amateur historian from Silver Spring,
Maryland, attempted to have Booth’s corpse
exhumed in order to determine whether it was his
or not. The case drew nationwide media coverage
and reached the Maryland Superior Court before
the group’s petition was denied. They continue to
search for what they believe to be Booth’s real
body—the carnival mummy of an Oklahoma
drifter known as David George embalmed in 1903.
Over the years the story has appeared in many
versions, not all of which agree on the specifics of
the escape or Booth’s subsequent life. In its main
outline, the case for Booth’s survival hinges on the
identity of the person shot by Boston Corbett in
the Garrett barn in the early morning of 26 April
1865. Most historians are satisfied that the person
struck by Corbett’s fatal shot was Lincoln’s assassin.
Legend adherents, however, point out the inconsistencies in the government’s evidence and appeal

Booth, John Wilkes

Actor and assassin John Wilkes Booth runs across the stage of Ford’s Theater after having shot President Abraham
Lincoln. A man climbs up on stage to pursue him. (Corbis)

to the retrospective accounts of eyewitnesses who
claimed the hair of the person shot was reddish,
not raven black like Booth’s. They assert the body
in the barn was that of a Virginia farmhand named
Ruddy or Rowdy, or a former Confederate officer
named Boyd.

The different versions of the legend reflect its
many sources, which included the workings of the
northern popular imagination in the wake of Lincoln’s shooting; Secretary of War Edwin Stanton’s
insistence on maintaining absolute secrecy in the
matter of Booth’s burial; southern accounts following
129

Boston Massacre

the Civil War; the claims of individuals purporting to
be Booth; and the retrospective accounts of veterans
near the end of the nineteenth century. The legend
enjoyed its greatest exposure in U.S. popular culture
during the 1920s and 1930s, with the display of
Booth’s alleged mummy in carnival sideshows across
the West and Midwest and the appearance of the
story in national periodicals including Life and the
Saturday Evening Post. It was also the subject of several popular literary works that drew from earlier
sources to either debunk or defend the legend.
One of the story’s most interesting features is the
extent to which the traumatized northern public
imagined Booth’s escape even before he was captured. Newspapers reported Booth sightings in
Chicago, New York, and Reading, Pennsylvania. In
addition to the sightings, accounts of the assassin
stressed his ability to defy detection and linked him
to mythical figures including Cain and the Wandering Jew, both of whom wandered the earth as
punishment for their misdeeds. Edwin Stanton’s
insistence on preventing any measure of recognition to Booth or his corpse was intended to deny
southern sympathizers the means to celebrate. His
awareness of the symbolic power of the assassin’s
corpse backfired, however, as the secrecy surrounding its handling fed rumors that it was not, in
fact, Booth’s. Secret Service chief Lafayette Baker’s
deliberate misleading of the press regarding the
burial was recorded on the cover of Leslie’s Illustrated Newspaper for 29 May 1865: the woodcut
engraving shows two men in a rowboat lowering a
shrouded body into the Potomac River. Later it was
revealed the body had been buried under the floor
of an army storehouse in Washington, D.C.
During Reconstruction, the legend took on a different guise as accounts of Booth sightings in foreign lands appeared in newspapers. These placed
the assassin in Ceylon, China, Mexico, and the
South Seas. The theme common to these accounts
was the figure of Booth as an honorable, intelligent, and cultured gentleman. He did not appear
remorseful for his deed and the locations in which
he was sighted paralleled the locations of the actual
Confederate exodus. In its southern variant the
legend appears to have served as a symbolic means
130

of vindication or final revenge. There is also evidence of multiple oral traditions in the South concerning his escape, and the story may have served
as part of the larger phenomenon of exile, which
historian Gaines Foster believes served defeated
white southerners as a psychological salve. By the
end of the century, the southern variant was joined
to the original northern versions in Finis L. Bates’s
Escape and Suicide of John Wilkes Booth (1907).
Drawing from both southern traditions and the retrospective accounts of capture eyewitnesses, Bates
crafted a reconciliationist version of the legend:
Booth remained the honorable and cultured southern gentleman, but he was remorseful for his deed
and suffered from his guilt. This treatment
accorded well with the temper of the times, which
witnessed the reunion of the white North and
South. It was also Bates who launched the posthumous carnival career of an alcoholic drifter named
David George as the Booth mummy.
C. Wyatt Evans
See also: Lincoln, Abraham, Assassination of.
References
Babcock, Bernie. 1925. Booth and the Spirit of
Lincoln: A Story of a Living Dead Man.
Philadelphia, PA, and London: J. B. Lippincott.
Bryan, George S. 1940. The Great American Myth.
New York: Carrick and Evans.
Forrester, Izola D. 1937. This One Mad Act: The
Unknown Story of John Wilkes Booth and His
Family. Boston, MA: Hale, Cushman and Flint.
Foster, Gaines M. 1988. Ghosts of the Confederacy:
Defeat, the Lost Cause, and the Emergence of the
New South, 1865 to 1913. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Lewis, Lloyd. 1929. Myths after Lincoln. New York:
Harcourt, Brace and Company.

Boston Massacre
On 5 March 1770, five members of a Boston
crowd, who had been harassing a British sentry
with taunts and snowballs, were shot and killed by
a squad of British soldiers, led by Captain Thomas
Preston. Six others were wounded in the shooting.
For fifteen years after the event, Bostonians com-

Boston Massacre

memorated its anniversary until it was replaced by
4 July celebrations of American independence.
Patriot propagandists immediately seized on the
deaths, calling the encounter a “massacre.” Word
of the engagement spread quickly throughout the
colonies. To the colonists, this further reaffirmed
their fears of a British conspiracy to deprive them
of their liberties and dominate not only Boston, but
all of the colonies.
The massacre was the culmination of steadily
heightening tensions in the city between Bostonians and British soldiers. The troops had been stationed there in the fall of 1768 to help customs officials uphold the Townshend duties. City residents
resented the presence of the troops and chafed
under the challenges and searches by armed
British sentries on the city streets. They did not
understand why it was necessary to station troops
in the city. Throwing snowballs was just one of
many ways the colonists struck back at the occupying army. Working-class citizens competed for
scarce jobs with the redcoats, who sought part-time
employment during their off-duty hours, and were
willing to work for less than the prevailing wage.
This led to particularly tense relations between the
troops and working-class Bostonians, who led and
comprised the majority of the Boston crowds. This
was certainly the case on the cold, moonless night
of 5 March. John Adams recalled that the group
gathered outside of the barracks on King Street
was composed of “a motley rabble of saucy boys,
negroes, mulattoes, Irish teagues, and outlandish
Jack tars” (Zobel, 292). All five of the dead were
members of Boston’s working-class population.
One, Crispus Attucks, was a seaman of black
and/or Indian ancestry.
Nor was the engagement of 5 March an isolated
event. One month before, eleven-year-old Christopher Sneider had been shot and killed by a customs
informer, Ebenezeer Richardson, who had fired
two shots into a crowd that had gathered outside of
his home. Sneider’s funeral, on 26 February, was
attended by thousands of the city’s residents. Just a
few days prior to the massacre, a brawl broke out
between a group of ropemakers and British soldiers. One of the ropemakers had taunted a soldier

seeking employment. The insulted redcoat returned with several of his compatriots to redress
the affront and a fight ensued. A Boston shoemaker
who was in the crowd the day of the massacre
recalled that several of the soldiers from the brawl
just days before were among those who confronted
the crowd on 5 March.
In the aftermath of the tragedy, Governor
Thomas Hutchinson was forced to remove all of
the British troops from the city to Castle William,
located on an island in the harbor. In an attempt to
demonstrate the impartiality of local justice, John
Adams and Josiah Quincy, two prominent leaders
of the patriot movement, defended Captain Preston along with eight of his men who were also
accused of firing into the crowd. The prosecution
mustered little evidence. No one positively identified Preston as either giving the order to fire or
himself firing, and he and six of his men were
acquitted. Two of the soldiers were found guilty of
manslaughter, branded on the hand, and released.
It is still not known who fired first or even if an official order to open fire was given. With the troops
out of Boston and all of the Townshend duties
except the tax on tea repealed, tensions in the city
relaxed.
However, the Boston Massacre had politicized
broad segments of the city’s population, as well as
moderates throughout the colonies, against the
British. The use of violence against Britons living in
Boston reinforced the colonists’ belief that the
British government, in both London and America,
was conspiring against them.
Jonathan Mercantini
See also: American Revolution.
References
Maier, Pauline. 1972. From Resistance to
Revolution: Colonial Radicals and the
Development of American Opposition to Britain,
1765–1776. New York: W. W. Norton.
Young, Alfred F. 1981. “George Robert Twelves
Hewes (1742–1840): A Boston Shoemaker and
the Memory of the American Revolution.”
William and Mary Quarterly, 3d ser., 38
(October): 561–623.
Zobel, Hiller B. 1970. The Boston Massacre. New
York: W. W. Norton.

131

Boston Tea Party

Boston Tea Party
British colonists saw the 16 December 1773 Boston
Tea Party as justified resistance to a conspiracy that
threatened their freedom. The relationship between
the North American colonies and the British government had changed dramatically since its victory
in the Seven Years’ War against France a decade earlier. The expense of maintaining a global empire had
increased substantially. Britain’s national debt nearly
doubled during the war years and costs further escalated when the government decided to station regular troops in North America to protect its expanded
territory. Facing growing resistance to taxation at
home, British ministers, beginning with George
Grenville, concluded that they must make the
empire more efficient and raise revenue in the
colonies. Most colonists, however, interpreted
efforts to enforce customs regulations and taxes like
the Stamp Act and the Townshend duties as elements in a grand scheme to take away their rights.
They demonstrated their concerns through petitions
and publications, economic boycotts, and crowd
actions, all of which led to the repeal of most of
those taxes.
Background
The remaining tax was on tea, a commodity widely
consumed in the colonies. However, many colonists
drank smuggled tea imported from Dutch sources.
This circumstance contributed heavily to a growing
financial crisis facing the British East India Company. In an effort to help the troubled company,
raise revenue, and confirm Parliament’s right to tax
the colonies, Prime Minister Frederick North
gained passage of the Tea Act in May 1773. This law
allowed the company to ship its tea directly to the
colonies and consign the commodity to its own
agents, reducing company costs. Although the tea
continued to carry a tax of three pence per pound,
the price would be less than that of smuggled tea.
Opposition to the Tea Act arose first in Philadelphia and New York, where merchants who had
been smuggling tea faced a serious loss of business.
They raised arguments that others soon incorporated into their conspiratorial analysis of British
actions. The merchants contended that the monop132

oly given the East India Company for the distribution of tea would be a precedent for all foreign
trade. They also argued that the Tea Act was a sinister ploy to deceive the colonists into accepting
the tea tax through a lower price for a favorite beverage. In response to threats of rough treatment
from mass meetings and numerous widely circulated broadsides, tea consignees in Philadelphia
and New York, as well as Charleston, South Carolina, resigned.
Boston radicals did not immediately respond because they were preoccupied with a scandal involving
Massachusetts Governor Thomas Hutchinson. They
had published some of the governor’s letters, revealing his belief in the need to abridge the colonists’
English liberties in certain circumstances. The letters
confirmed for many that Hutchinson was a coconspirator in the plan to enslave them. In response, the
Massachusetts House of Representatives dispatched
a petition to the king demanding his recall. When
Bostonians shifted their attention to the issue of
taxed tea in October, they swiftly united. Both the
Boston Gazette and a town meeting called upon the
tea consignees, including two of Governor Hutchinson’s sons, to resign. The consignees refused to do so,
and there the matter stood until the arrival of the
Dartmouth, the first of three tea ships, on 28 November. Imperial law required that the tea duty be paid
before the cargo could be unloaded and if not paid
within twenty days (by 17 December), the cargo
could be seized. On 29 and 30 November, mass
meetings of perhaps 5,000 people instructed the consignees, who had fled to the well-fortified Castle
William in Boston Harbor, to return their cargoes.
Over the next several days, citizens in neighboring
towns joined Bostonians in this demand, all to no
avail. Following a third mass meeting two weeks
later, Boston’s leading radical, Samuel Adams, led a
delegation to customs officials demanding that the
tea ships be permitted to leave without paying the
duty. However, he met with a firm refusal.
The Tea Party and Its Consequences
On 16 December, a day before the tea could be
seized by customs officials, over 5,000 people
crowded into Old South Church and ordered Fran-

Boston Tea Party

American colonists cheer as demonstrators dressed as Indians throw tea from British ships. (Bettmann/Corbis)

cis Rotch, the owner of the Dartmouth, to ask
Governor Hutchinson for a customs clearance.
When Rotch returned with word of the governor’s
refusal, Samuel Adams announced nothing more
could be done to save the country. This was an
apparent signal for three groups of men to proceed
to Griffin’s Wharf, where the three tea ships had
anchored, and throw the tea overboard. Barely disguised as “Mohawks,” the men methodically threw
about 90,000 pounds of tea into the harbor without
harming any crew members or customs officials.
They destroyed no other property and punished
those who attempted to take some of the tea. They
and 2,000 witnesses saw these actions as an essential defense of the colonists’ liberties.
Drawing upon the work of several generations of
English dissenting writers, notably the earlyeighteenth-century essayists John Trenchard and
Thomas Gordon, colonists of the 1770s saw liberty
and power in perpetual conflict. In that context, they

viewed all the actions taken by the British government as unacceptable extensions of power, as part of
an effort to subvert their liberties. Destroying the
tea, in the colonists’ view, was a measured and
appropriate response to an insidious attempt to
induce them to become complicit in their own slavery by paying a tax imposed without their approval.
If anyone doubted their wisdom, Boston radicals
simply pointed to the British government’s response
to the tea’s destruction. When word reached London of the Boston Tea Party, Parliament rapidly
passed the Coercive Acts to punish the town of
Boston and the colony of Massachusetts Bay. The
port of Boston was closed, town meetings could be
held only with the royal government’s permission,
the Crown would appoint members of the Council,
and troops could be quartered in empty private
dwellings. The Coercive Acts convinced many
colonists that united action was necessary. If the
British government could take away the liberties of
133

British Royal Family

the people of Massachusetts, the liberties of all were
at risk. Persuaded that royal officials were intent
upon the destruction of self-government, twelve
colonies responded to a call for a Continental Congress to assemble in Philadelphia in September
1774, a step that ultimately led to revolution.
Larry Gragg
See also: American Revolution; Coercive Acts;
Quebec Act.
References
Bailyn, Bernard. 1967. The Ideological Origins of
the American Revolution. Cambridge, MA:
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Fowler, William M., Jr. 1997. Samuel Adams:
Radical Puritan. New York: Longman.
Labaree, Benjamin Woods. 1964. The Boston Tea
Party. New York: Oxford University Press.
Young, Alfred F. 1999. The Shoemaker and the Tea
Party. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.

British Royal Family
The British royal family has been the source of
numerous conspiracy theories throughout U.S. history. The late colonial and Revolutionary War eras
in America were the most prolific periods for conspiracies involving British royals. The bitter struggle for independence established a context in
which the general popular opinion in America at
this time held, as one pair of historians recently
noted, “chronic suspicion of all things British”
(Elkins and McKitrick, 432).
Figures like Benedict Arnold (who fought for
the Americans in the War of Independence but
then defected to the British) represent the very
real danger faced by loyalists for their unpatriotic
actions, which often fueled popular intrigue. Yet,
during this time there existed substantial loyalty to
Britain throughout the colonies, and in some this
was the majority sentiment. In 1766 in Delaware,
for example, about half of the 37,000-strong population were in opposition to war with Britain. This
group of loyalists was important because it formed
a political and cultural countercurrent that would
come to dominate politically after the war.
The British royal family has been viewed as a
source of conspiracy and intrigue since the early
134

years of the republic, and in particular the attitude
of King George III toward the colonists has long
haunted the American popular mind. Reparations
for loyalists and British creditors were among the
important negotiating points for John Jay in his
securing of the 1783 Treaty between the United
States and Great Britain. But in the partisan debate
over the treaty, opponents made clear their perceived collusion of Jay and the Federalists with the
English Crown and wealthy British interests, such
that Fisher Ames, in defense of the treaty, asserted
that not even a treaty that “left King George his
island” and “stipulated he pay rent on it” would suffice critics (qtd. in Hancock, 1).
The publication of The Address of the People of
England to the Inhabitants of America by Sir John
Dalrymple revealed the explicit design of the Crown
to develop an aristocratic strata of American society
loyal not only to the King’s government but to the
Tory social order as well. The historian Gordon
Wood noted the effect was that “every successive
step by the Crown, under the guise of a corrupt and
pliant Parliament, only confirmed American fears of
a despotic conspiracy against freedom” (Wood, 42).
And during his presidency, George Washington held
serious reservations about British motives surrounding subversive and secretive policies designed to negatively impact American interests. Examples include
British Order in Council 6 in November 1793, Pinckney’s dispatch to Randolph on 25 November 1793,
and the Dorchester speech in March 1794. Ironically, it would later be the partisan opposition of the
Federalists that would echo these same concerns for
conspiracies emanating from designs by the British
Crown, but allege the Federalists with complicity.
One great conspiracy during the Washington
administration involved the allegation that John
Adams, Alexander Hamilton, and others in the
Federalist Party were secretly planning to institute
a monarchy modeled on the British Crown in
America. The issues of monarchy and aristocratic
titles continued to be controversial and the source
of continued conspiracy speculation during the
presidency of John Adams. Adams was so impacted
by these allegations that he made distinct statements to clearly demonstrate his loyalty to existing

Brown, John

American constitutional institutions during his
Inaugural Address. Adams was responding to
charges such as those made by the journalist James
Callender, who authored The Prospect before Us,
and for which he was later convicted under the
Alien and Sedition Acts. In The Prospect before Us,
Callender accused Adams of “being a toady to
English interests, and of wishing to install a monarchy in the U.S.” (qtd. in Rhenquist, 48).
After the early nineteenth century, the British
Royal family and British interests and society generally became a less attractive subject of paranoid partisans or conspiracy theorists. The “special relationship” between the United States and Britain
developed and their shared language, common heritage, and cultural, political, and economic interests
made them natural allies—indeed the closest of
allies, as the United States replaced Britain as the
hegemonic power in the West, and assumed maintenance of Western order in the international system.
The British royal family have become popular media
figures in the United States and a major U.S. tourist
asset for Britain.
This relationship has not precluded the continued development of extremist conspiracy theories
at the margins of American society today. Among
the most bizarre conspiracy theories to emerge in
recent years is the claim by A-Albionic Consulting
and Research, based in Ferndale, Michigan, that
the British royal family is in a secret struggle with
the Vatican, dating back to the reign of the first
Queen Elizabeth, when Protestants and Catholics
were in conflict all over Europe. A-Albionic alleges
that the British royal family and their Jewish internationalist allies are controlling the world supply of
drugs and money, and wielding subversive influence over world affairs. Additionally, the political
organization of Lyndon LaRouche has echoed
these British royal conspiracy plots in their political
communications in recent times.
Michael W. Hail
See also: American Revolution; Arnold, Benedict;
LaRouche, Lyndon.
References
Ames, Seth, ed. 1954. The Works of Fisher Ames.
Boston.

British Order in Council. 1793. November 6.
Dalrymple, John. 1775. The Address of the People of
England to the Inhabitants of America. London.
Elkins, Stanley, and Eric McKitrick. 1993. The Age
of Federalism. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Hancock, Harold Bell. 1972. The Delaware
Loyalists. Boston, MA: Gregg Press.
Howe, Daniel Walker. 1979. The Political Culture of
the American Whigs. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Jennings, Sir Ivor. 1954. The Queen’s Government.
Baltimore, MD: Penguin.
Rhenquist, William H. 1999. Grand Inquests. New
York: Quill.
Rose, Richard. 1980. Politics in England. Boston,
MA: Little, Brown, and Co.
Shaw, Peter. The Character of John Adams. 1976.
Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina
Press.
U.S. House. 1965. Inaugural Addresses of the
Presidents of the U.S. 89th Cong., 1st sess., H.
Doc. 51. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Wood, Gordon S. 1969. The Creation of the
American Republic 1776–1787. New York: W. W.
Norton and Co.
Website
A-albionic: http://a-albionic.com/a-albionic/gopher/
conspiracy/a-albionic/articles/origins.

Brown, John
John Brown led an unspectacular life until he was
well into his fifties, when he began leading violent
antislavery activity in the Midwest. This reached its
culmination when he conspired with six northern
abolitionists and attempted to lead a slave insurrection in the South by raiding the federal arsenal at Harper’s Ferry, Virginia. Although it is
unclear whether Brown believed he could actually
begin an insurrection, he did succeed in pushing
the issue of slavery to the boiling point. The violence at Harper’s Ferry, which caused southern
fears of future conspiracies, would be one of the
key events that set the Civil War in motion.
Brown was born on 9 May 1800 in Torrington,
Connecticut. Five years later, the family moved to
Ohio’s Western Reserve, where Brown grew up,
absorbing his father’s Calvinism, strict discipline,
135

Brown, John

and hatred of slavery. Brown worked a variety of
jobs in Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York, including tanning and sheep-farming, and during his life
fathered some twenty children. He was never successful in any of his business ventures and in 1842
he declared bankruptcy. In 1848, Brown moved his
family, more or less permanently, to North Elba,
New York.
In 1848, for a short-lived abolitionist newspaper
called The Ram’s Horn, Brown published a satirical
essay, “Sambo’s Mistakes,” in which the narrator
assumes the persona of a Negro who looks back on
a life wasted in submissiveness to whites. Around
this time, Brown’s thoughts on slavery began to
turn increasingly activist and violent—unlike most
abolitionists, he had never made a commitment to
nonviolence. He had met Frederick Douglass for
the first time the previous year and told him of his
plans to free the slaves. Though Douglass would
later decline Brown’s offer to join him in raiding
Harper’s Ferry (on the grounds that such a plan
was “suicidal”), there is strong evidence that Brown
caused Douglass to rethink his own nonviolent
abolitionism. Responding to the Fugitive Slave Act
compromise of 1850, which attempted to appease
slaveholders and ease North-South tensions,
Brown founded the League of Gileadites in 1851,
which authorized its forty-four black members to
murder slavecatchers.
By the time he attended an 1855 convention of
abolitionists in Syracuse, New York, Brown had
become an abolitionist zealot who increasingly
identified himself and his cause with those of the
Old Testament warriors. Later that year, he moved
to Kansas (leaving his wife and younger children in
North Elba), where six of his sons and a son-in-law
had taken up claims on land. Near Pottawatomie in
May 1856, in retaliation for the murder of FreeSoilers by proslavery men, Brown, with three of his
sons and a few other men, abducted five proslavery
settlers and murdered them, some by broadsword.
Neither Brown nor the other men were ever
indicted for the massacre. “Captain Brown,” with
his small company of Free-State raiders, continued
participating in other militant antislavery maneuvers in the Kansas bushwhacking wars of the 1850s.
136

In December 1858, Brown and his men, in concert
with another company led by Aaron Stevens, went
into Missouri, ransacked proslavery homes, and
freed eleven slaves.
Earlier that year, while in Boston, Brown met
secretly with six northern backers of his scheme to
invade the South: Thomas Wentworth Higginson,
Theodore Parker, Samuel Gridley Howe, George
L. Stearns, Franklin Benjamin Sanborn, and Gerrit
Smith. The six backers diverted funds in various
ways to support Brown, even though Brown did
not supply them with many specific plans; other
than a vague notion of attracting slaves as he
moved southward from Appalachia, Brown apparently had no developed plan. All ardent abolitionists, the Secret Six (as they came to be known)
thought that even if Brown failed to incite a slave
insurrection, his operations, whatever they were,
would ignite the powder keg of a civil war that
would lead to the end of slavery.
Renting a farm across the Potomac River from
Harper’s Ferry, Virginia (now West Virginia), in
1859, Brown planned to seize the federal arsenal
there and arm the area slaves that he expected to
rise up in the wake of the raid. Brown’s raid on
Harper’s Ferry seems to have been doomed from
the start: Brown’s army—twenty-two men, including Brown, three of his sons, and five blacks—was
too small to carry out an invasion of the South. He
had little or no definite idea about what to do after
overtaking the arsenal, nor did he let the nearby
slaves know he expected them to join him after he
had taken control.
The actual raid started out as well as Brown could
have hoped: he and his men killed the mayor of
Harper’s Ferry, took some townspeople hostage,
and easily captured the lightly guarded armory
complex on the evening of 16 October. But only a
few slaves were rounded up by Brown’s men for the
insurrection, and one of Brown’s men shot a free
black railroad worker. The next morning, locals
began sniping at Brown and his men, and Maryland’s militia occupied the town. By afternoon, eight
of the raiders, including two of Brown’s sons, were
killed. That night, the marines, commanded by
Robert E. Lee and J.E.B. Stuart, arrived, attacked

Brown Scare

with a battering ram, and captured Brown and his
men.
To head off a possible lynching, the state of Virginia quickly indicted, tried, and convicted Brown
of treason, murder, and fomenting insurrection.
Brown rejected his counsel’s pleas of insanity and
was hanged on 2 December in Charleston. Six of
his raiders were hanged at later dates. Brown had
left documents in a Maryland farmhouse implicating the Secret Six. Political squabbles ensued after
Brown’s execution; the proslavery Democrats
(erroneously) believed that the Republicans had
something to do with Brown’s raid. By a combination of the incompetence of the Senate investigative committee and the false testimony of Howe
and Stearns (the only two of the Secret Six to show
up for questioning), no conspiracy was found, and
no one outside of Brown and his raiders was
indicted.
Though Brown’s raid on Harper’s Ferry was a
failure in execution, it further polarized an already
divided country. Brown’s raid made southerners
afraid that an insurrection by “Black Republicans”
was imminent. Secessionist newspapers alleged
that Lincoln, if elected in 1860, would, like Brown,
incite slaves to insurrection and violence. For many
northerners, Brown was a martyr, a portent of a
larger war to end slavery.
Bryan L. Moore
See also: Abolitionism; Fugitive Slave Act.
References
McPherson, James M. 1988. Battle Cry of Freedom:
The Civil War Era. New York: Oxford Universtiy
Press.
Oates, Stephen B. 1970. To Purge This Land with
Blood: A Biography of John Brown. New York:
Harper and Row.

Brown Scare
The rise of Nazism and the advent of World War II
in Europe increased concerns about collective
security in the United States. In the context of economic depression, populist demagogues gained
mass followings by identifying scapegoats and
promising simple solutions. Given the proliferating

numbers of antisemitic and pro-fascist groups and
rumors of armed conspiracies against the government, many liberals became anxious about the
potential for fascism in the United States. Influential educators, philanthropists, social scientists, and
government bureaucrats questioned the U.S. public’s capacity for making responsible choices,
because they believed that totalitarian propagandists were deceiving the public with manipulative
propaganda. Although Nazi espionage activity was
badly flawed, fears about the persuasive power of
Nazi propaganda led to restrictions on freedom of
association and communication in the United
States.
Employing the politics of guilt-by-association,
liberal and leftist activists denounced far-right agitators, isolationists, and anticommunists as Fifth
Columnist conspirators. They sponsored forums,
issued newsletters, and mustered demonstrations
against those whom they opposed. They warned
that con men could dupe Americans, that fascism
would triumph in disguise. Respectable journalists
and influential columnists repeated their claims.
The House Un-American Activities Committee
(HUAC) and state un-American committees were
created to monitor such activities, and subversive
organizations were required to register with the
government. Reacting to conservative charges that
New Dealers were abetting the Communist conspiracy in the United States, meanwhile, leftists
attempted to link conservatives to antisemitic agitators. In the context of this “brown scare” (a term
modeled on the anticommunist red scare), the
Roosevelt administration manipulated fears about
Nazi spies and saboteurs, prosecuting antisemitic
agitators for seditious conspiracy, and charging that
isolationists were un-American. In the campaign
against foreign subversion, a coercive state apparatus developed, one that would subordinate the government’s role as a protector of liberties to that of
maintainer of security.
The brown scare materialized, in part, because
Fifth Column fears were based upon plausible
assumptions. Memories of German sabotage operations during World War I had not yet receded,
and German nationals did play a role in the Nazi
137

Brown Scare

conquests of Austria, Czechoslovakia, and Poland.
Endeavoring to draw the United States closer to
the Allies, British intelligence uncovered Nazi
covert activities in the Western Hemisphere and
generated rumors about potential subversion in the
United States. U.S. government investigators
broke several Nazi spy rings, exposed clumsy Nazi
propaganda efforts, and, after Pearl Harbor,
thwarted sabotage missions. Some rightist groups
did advocate violence and overthrow of the U.S.
government, and some even established contact
with the Nazi regime. In 1941, a Justice Department investigation revealed that George Silvester
Viereck, a Reich propaganda agent, had written
several speeches for Senator Ernest Lundeen.
With the help of George Hill, a press clerk for Representative Hamilton Fish, Viereck had also
secured thousands of congressional frank
envelopes, which they used to mail 50,000 reprints
from isolationist speeches and Congressional
Record excerpts.
Nazi propaganda efforts aimed at recruiting
German Americans to a Fifth Column, however,
met with utter failure. The Friends of the New
Germany, a front organization that endeavored to
take over or influence German American community groups and newspapers, only managed to draw
in about 5,000–10,000 German citizens and
recently naturalized emigrés between 1933 and
1935. The group’s coercive tactics infuriated German Americans, drawing negative press coverage
and government investigators. Responding to a
Non-Sectarian Anti-Nazi League report on German propaganda, a federal grand jury indicted
Friends leader Heinz Spanknoebel for failing to
register as a foreign agent, and he left the country
in October 1933.
Members of the Teutonia Society formed the
German-American Bund, which, unlike Teutonia,
received no finances from and had no political ties
to Berlin. In 1935, the organization was revitalized
under the management of Fritz Julius Kuhn, a
recently naturalized citizen who lied about his personal relationship with Hitler in order to gain political standing. Although the Bund aimed to raise
support for the Nazi regime, the group posed little
138

threat to internal security, because an embarrassed
Nazi regime repudiated it and, more importantly,
the group failed to mobilize support among German Americans. Congressman Samuel Dickstein,
however, charged that Kuhn commanded 20,000
followers, a tenth of whom were preparing for military combat. Representative John Martin declared
that those who sympathized with the Bund were
traitors. In 1938, thirty-eight Bundists on Long
Island were convicted of failing to register as members of an oath-bound organization. Convicted of
larceny and forgery, Kuhn was imprisoned in
December 1939. The 2,000 or so remaining
Bundists struggled along until Pearl Harbor under
a successor, Wilhelm Kunze, who really was a contact for a German espionage ring.
The U.S. demagogue who most clearly
expressed sympathy for the Nazi cause was William
D. Pelley. Like Kuhn, Pelley claimed that the
White House was part of the international Bolshevist conspiracy and that a Jewish oligarchy controlled U.S. diplomacy. By 1934 he had recruited
about 15,000 people to his Silver Shirts, a paramilitary organization that promised to reorganize society along racialist and military lines. Pelley established contact with Nazi propaganda agencies and
his Silver Shirts distributed copies of Mein Kampf
as well as reprints from Julius Striecher’s Der
Sturmer. Despite his admiration for military hierarchy and his advocacy of Jewish ghettoization,
however, Pelley’s antisemitism derived from U.S.
populist traditions. Despite the lack of any ties
between Pelley and the Hitler regime beyond the
exchange of literature and letters, the Silver Shirts,
like the Bund and a host of other antisemitic agitators, were pursued by the FBI and exposed by the
House Un-American Activities Committee.
Another oft-mentioned Hitler-sympathizer was
Gerald Winrod. A nativist preacher from Kansas,
Winrod had been assailing liberal theology, Darwinism, and changing social mores since 1925. He
embraced conspiratorial antisemitism after traveling to Europe in 1934. As his preaching became
increasingly antisemitic, subscriptions to his
Defender publication, where he lauded the Third
Reich as a bulwark against communism, rose from

Brown Scare

60,000 in 1934 to 110,000 by 1938. Winrod’s antisemitism, however, remained theological, not
racial, and he continued to promote conversion as
a solution to the Jewish problem. His dispensationalist theology—he believed that Jews would unite
with a flesh and blood Antichrist whom he
expected to appear imminently—was far removed
from Nazi ideology. Like Pelley, he celebrated U.S.
notions of individualism, the producer ethic, and
the gospel of success.
Both Winrod and Pelley, then, grounded their
undemocratic politics and bigotry in U.S. traditions. While each either exchanged literature with
German propagandists, the Bund, or each other,
neither accepted any money from the Nazi regime.
Their criticism of the New Deal as a usurpation of
power was directly opposed to the National Socialist model of government. Their reputation as Nazis
then, also owes as much to countersubversive fears
that antisemitism and paramilitary trappings signaled Fifth Column activity, as to any substantive
threat that their organizations posed to Republican
institutions or the development of racial tolerance
in the period leading up to World War II.
Nevertheless, these and other far-right demagogues met with mail censorship, fund freezing,
repatriation, denaturalization, and prosecution. In
1936, Roosevelt ordered the FBI to begin surveillance and in 1938 he gave the Bureau authority to
compile files on groups such as the Silver Shirts, the
Knights of the White Camellia, and the Christian
Front. The FBI also began compiling a custodial
detention index of persons with Nazi or Communist
tendencies. Agents attended antiwar demonstrations, examined education and employment
records, opened first-class mail, and, after receiving
authorization in May 1940, began electronic surveillance. The administration also gave the Catholic
Church hierarchy a choice that month: silence antiRoosevelt radio broadcaster Father Charles Coughlin or watch a sedition trial. Coughlin was silenced.
When Senator Burton Wheeler used his congressional frank to distribute postcards purchased
by the isolationist America First organization, Secretary of War Henry Stimson charged that Wheeler
was “coming very close to the line of subversive

activities against the United States, if not treason”
(Smith, 170). When Charles Lindberg listed Jews
as among the three most powerful forces promoting the war in September 1941, the Friends of
Democracy called America First a Nazi front, and
asked whether Lindberg was a Nazi. Lindberg was
no Nazi, or even an antisemite, but by this time
even intimations of antisemitism could be equated
with Nazism. Roosevelt had already branded Lindberg a “copperhead” and a “modern Vallandingham,” but the Des Moines speech did irreparable
harm to the isolationist cause (Smith, 176).
Dissatisfied with an FBI report that America
First received no illicit funding, FDR urged Attorney General Nicholas Biddle to bring the issue to a
grand jury. In early 1942, the Justice Department
produced indictments, under the Espionage Act,
of twenty-one far-right opponents of the war,
charging them with conspiring to destroy morale in
the U.S. armed forces. The prosecution attempted
to link antisemitic agitators such as Pelley and Winrod to George Silvester Viereck and former Bund
leaders. It focused on similarities between fourteen
themes selected from Nazi propaganda and statements made or published by the defendants.
Although the case ultimately ended in a mistrial, it
achieved its underlying purpose by forcing the
accused to hire lawyers, raise bail, and languish in
jail.
The brown scare had three important implications. First, isolationism became an epithet during
World War II and until the late 1960s; interventionism became virtually unassailable. Second, the
FBI gained the power to investigate subversive
activity, ultimately leading to the creation of a
national security state. Finally, during the cold war,
academics translated brown scare motifs and misunderstandings into social science idiom. Anxieties
about extremism came to color subsequent academic debates about such diverse phenomena as
McCarthyism, white supremacy, the Christian
Right, and the militia movement, contributing to
consensus narratives of U.S. history, and the use of
psychiatric theory to explain unpopular ideologies
and political behaviors.
John Drabble

139

Brussell, Mae

See also: German Americans and World War I;
House Un-American Activities Committee; Silver
Shirts.
References
Canedy, Susan. 1998. America’s Nazis: A Democratic
Dilemma. Menlo Park, CA: Markgraf Publishing
Group.
Carlson, John Roy [Arthur Derounian]. 1943. Under
Cover: My Four Years in the Nazi Underworld of
America—The Amazing Revelation of How Axis
Agents and Our Enemies within Are Now
Plotting to Destroy the United States. New York:
E. P. Dutton and Company.
———. 1946. The Plotters. New York: E. P. Dutton
and Company.
Cole, Wayne S. 1983. Roosevelt and the Isolationists,
1932–1945. Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press.
Diamond, Sander A. 1974. The Nazi Movement in
the United States, 1924–1941. New York: Cornell
University Press.
Gary, Brett. 1999. The Nervous Liberals:
Propaganda Anxieties from World War I to the
Cold War. New York: Coumbia University Press.
Glasser, Martha. 1974. “The German American
Bund in New Jersey.” New Jersey History 92: 1,
33–49.
Highham, Charles. 1985. American Swastika.
Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Jenkins, Philip. Hoods and Shirts: The Extreme
Right in Pennsylvania, 1925–1950. Chapel Hill,
NC: University of North Carolina Press.
Johnson, Niel M. 1972. George Sylvester Viereck:
German-American Propagandists. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.
MacDonnell, Francis. 1995. The Axis Fifth Column
and the American Home Front. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press.
Marshall, George. 1942. “Foreword” in Investigate
Martin Dies! The Case for a Grand Jury
Investigation of Martin Dies Submitted to the
Department of Justice on August 6, 1942 by the
National Federation for Constitutional Liberties.
New York: Np.
O’Reilly, Kenneth. 1983. Hoover and the UnAmericans: The FBI, HUAC, and the Red
Menace. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University
Press.
Ribuffo, Leo P. 1983. The Old Christian Right: The
Protestant Far Right from the Great Depression
to the Cold War. Philadelphia, PA: Temple
University Press.

140

Rogge, John. 1961. The Official German Report:
Nazi Penetration 1924–1942, Pan Arabism
1939–Today. New York: Thomas Yoseloff.
Sayers, Michael, and Albert E. Kahn. 1942.
Sabotage! The Secret War against America. New
York: Harper Brothers.
Smith, Geoffrey S. 1992. To Save a Nation:
American Countersubversives, the New Deal, and
the Coming of World War II. New York: Basic
Books.
U.S. House. 1935. Investigation of Nazi and Other
Propaganda. 74th Cong., 1st Sess., H. Rept. 153
(Serial 9890). Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.

Brussell, Mae
Mae Brussell was a broadcaster and influential figure in the conspiracy research community that
began to emerge after the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in 1963. She was born in
Beverly Hills in 1922, the daughter of a prominent
Los Angeles rabbi and granddaughter of the
founder of the I. Magnin department stores. Brussell lived as an affluent housewife with five children, until the shooting of alleged Kennedy assassin Lee Harvey Oswald live on television prompted
her into investigating the assassination. She quickly
became dissatisfied with the official government
conclusion that the murder had been the work of
a lone assassin. She began reading and crossreferencing the complete 26-volume report of the
Warren Commission, and started amassing a large
collection of newspaper clippings, articles, and
books relating to what she came to believe was a
vast conspiracy that since World War II has been
turning the United States into a fascist regime. Her
argument was partly based on information that was
emerging at the time about “Operation Paperclip,”
the U.S. government’s wartime plan to rescue Nazi
rocket scientists after World War II, but its conclusions went well beyond the commonly established
facts. Brussell presented her ideas on a weekly
radio show, Dialogue: Conspiracy (later called
World Watchers International), on KLRB, a local
station in Carmel, California, her new home. During the 1970s and 1980s she wrote much-discussed

Bryan, William Jennings

articles outlining her thesis in, for example, Paul
Krassner’s countercultural magazine, The Realist,
and Hustler editor Larry Flynt’s new venture,
Rebel magazine (“The Nazi Connection to the John
F. Kennedy Assassination”). In 1983 Brussell’s
radio show moved to KAZU in Pacific Grove, California, where she continued until her death from
cancer in 1988. In keeping with her theory of a
wide-reaching conspiracy within the U.S. establishment, Brussell speculated that her cancer had been
induced by the CIA, but no evidence ever
emerged. After her death various factions within
the assassination research community sought to
establish a permanent archive of Brussell’s writings, notes, and clippings (which began to take on
a legendary status), but to date there is only a limited website.
Peter Knight
See also: Kennedy, John F., Assassination of;
Warren Commission Report.
Reference
Vankin, Jonathan. 1991. Conspiracies, Cover-ups,
and Crimes: Political Manipulation and Mind
Control in America. New York: Paragon House.
Website
Mae Brussel: http://www.maebrussell.com.

Bryan, William Jennings
An eloquent speaker of Populist tendencies,
William Jennings Bryan (D-NE) delivered one of
the most famous conspiracy speeches of all time to
the Democratic convention in 1896 when he
warned big business and those favoring the gold
standard, “You shall not crucify mankind on a cross
of gold.” Bryan lost the presidential contest to the
advocate of the gold standard, Republican William
McKinley, essentially ending the bimetallism
debate in the United States that had characterized
the Progressive era and served as a unifying point
for the Populist Party.
Bryan was born in Salem, Illinois, studied law at
Union College of Law, and practiced in Jacksonville,
Illinois, before moving to Lincoln, Nebraska. There,
he became active in Democratic Party politics and

by the 1890s joined the free silver movement that
sought to force the federal government to purchase
western silver at inflated prices to expand the money
supply. He won election to Congress in 1890, but in
1894 was defeated in his Senate campaign. At the
Democratic convention, where Bryan became a
political star, he was one of several pro-silver voices,
but clearly the most theatrical. He had honed his
oratorical skills by a series of speaking tours and
Chatauqua lectures, and even in defeat to McKinley,
Bryan remained the undisputed leader of the
Democratic Party.
Like other silver advocates, Bryan thought a
conspiracy of Wall Street bankers and easterners
had forced the gold standard upon debtors to
increase in real terms the amount they repaid. In
addition, however, antisemitism was widespread in
the Populist Party, from which Bryan drew much of
his support. Concerns over “Jewish moneyed interests” in New York had aligned many antisemites
against the gold standard, and Bryan used what
some conspiracy theorists see as coded language to
speak to those concerns.
In foreign affairs, however, Bryan toed the anticonspiracy line as an anti-imperialist, resisting U.S.
intervention in Cuba. (Even then, his position did
not please some Populist supporters, who thought
he could have done more. Therefore, in L. Frank
Baum’s Wonderful Wizard of Oz [1900], which is
widely viewed as a parable on Populism, most analysts see the Cowardly Lion as representing Bryan.)
Bryan’s oratory and his grass-roots support kept
him a perennial candidate for the presidency,
which he lost to McKinley again in 1900, and to
Taft in 1908.
By 1912, a new political star in the Democratic
Party had risen, Woodrow Wilson, and at the convention that year, Bryan threw his support behind
him. Partly as a reward, Bryan received an appointment as Secretary of State in the Wilson administration. Given Bryan’s support for easy money policies, which were viewed as a response to one
conspiracy, it is ironic that he joined an administration that presided over the creation of the Federal
Reserve Board, which was criticized by conspiracy

141

Bryan, William Jennings

1915 portrait of William Jennings Bryan. Photo by
Hartsook. (Bettmann/Corbis)

theorists as inflationary. In the area of foreign
affairs, Bryan with his noninterventionist views
began to clash with the president, who saw in the
1915 sinking of the liner Lusitania a cause of war.
Bryan resigned from Wilson’s cabinet because of the
president’s response to Germany over the incident,
fearing that it committed the nation to war. Conspiracy theorists tie Wilson’s desire for intervention
to a variety of forces, including control by the Bank
of England, the British monarchy, or other shadowy
characters somehow related to preservation of the
gold standard and/or Anglo-American relations.
Thus, Bryan, the voice of silver and peace, could not
long survive in such a setting. After the war, Bryan
opposed the Treaty of Versailles unless it contained

142

the “Lodge Reservations” that kept the United
States out of the League of Nations.
Bryan next became famous for his involvement
in the Scopes Trial, which was far outside the
debates over silver or European intervention. John
T. Scopes was a teacher in Dayton, Tennessee, who
violated Tennessee law that prohibited the teaching of the theory of evolution in public schools.
Bryan served as assistant prosecutor in the case
and, during the course of the trial, took the stand as
an expert on the Bible. According to the mythology
generated by Arthur Miller’s play, Inherit the
Wind, H. L. Mencken’s newspaper columns, and
F. L. Allen’s history of the 1920s, Only Yesterday,
the defense attorney, Clarence Darrow, embarrassed Bryan and thereby (it was claimed) discredited the anti-evolution position. Subsequent
research has shown that only the East Coast media
substantially portrayed the popular version of the
events, and that local news coverage thought that
Bryan held his ground well in the exchanges.
(Scopes was indeed found guilty.)
The Scopes Monkey Trial generated a strain of
conspiracy thinking among creationist groups, who
have seen the media as deliberately distorting the
evidence of evolution based on the developments
of the trial. A different conspiracy of sorts involved
the publicity surrounding the trial itself—a meeting called the “Drugstore Conspiracy.” George W.
Rappelyea, a local mine owner and coal company
operator, saw an opportunity to promote the city of
Dayton. He gathered some of the leading figures of
Dayton for a meeting in a local drugstore, whereupon Rappelyea agreed to fund Scopes to challenge the evolution law and to bring in the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) to provide the
national attention. During the trial, fraudulent evidence on the Piltdown Man and the Nebraska Man
was introduced as a confirmation of evolution.
Bryan died in Dayton, not long after the trial, having crossed the lines between several major conspiracy movements in U.S. history—the gold standard, the British manipulation of U.S. foreign
affairs, and the “creation/evolution” debate.
Larry Schweikart

Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms

See also: Gold Standard.
References
Coletta, Paolo. 1964. William Jennings Bryan:
Political Evangelist, 1860–1908. Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press.
Hicks, John D. 1931. The Populist Revolt.
Minneapolis. University of Minnesota Press.
Hofstadter, Richard. 1965. The Paranoid Style in
American Politics, and Other Essays. New York:
Knopf.
Larson, Edward J. 1997. Summer for the Gods: The
Scopes Trial and America’s Continuing Debate
over Science and Religion. New York: BasicBooks.
Website
The Tennessee Monkey Trial: http://www3.mistral.
co.uk/bradburyac/tennesse.html.

Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms
(BATF) is a tax-collecting, enforcement, and regulatory arm of the U.S. Department of the Treasury.
It is the government agency with responsibility for
administering America’s federal alcohol, tobacco,
and firearms laws, as well as federal laws relating to
commercial arson and explosives. It is because of
its role in regulating these areas—especially the
nation’s firearms laws—that the BATF has often
been embroiled in allegations of conspiracy.
BATF headquarters are in Washington, D.C.,
but most of its personnel and many of its operations are decentralized in regional offices throughout the United States, and even a few stations overseas. The bureau traces its roots back to the 1790s,
but its earliest twentieth-century form is to be
found in the Prohibition Unit established within
the Bureau of Internal Revenue of the Treasury
Department in 1920 to enforce the ban on the
manufacture and sale of alcohol enacted by the
Eighteenth Amendment and the Volstead Act in
1919. (The most famous member of the Prohibition Unit was Elliot Ness, the “T-man” who helped
topple Chicago mobster Al Capone on tax-evasion
charges.) The agency has undergone many changes
of name and responsibilities since the 1920s, and it
was given its present title in 1972.

Suspicions about the BATF’s alleged involvement in conspiratorial activities have been particularly pronounced since the passage of the Gun
Control Act in 1968, which gave the agency extra
responsibilities for enforcing the nation’s gun laws.
Indeed, it is matters connected with gun regulation
such as licensing, gun tracing, illegal firearms possession, and transportation rather than any of its
other responsibilities that have provoked the most
controversy and concern. The BATF has often
been attacked by gun rights organizations such as
the National Rifle Association, Gun Owners of
America, the Citizens Committee for the Right to
Keep and Bear Arms, Jews for the Preservation of
Firearms Ownership, and, since the mid-1990s,
various parts of the militia movement, for example.
Such groups routinely criticize the BATF as an
“out-of-control,” “rogue agency” harassing innocent gun owners and dealers. Nor are they alone in
this. In 1995, Representative Harold Volkmer
called the BATF “One of the most Rambo-rogue
law enforcement agencies in the United States”
(Spitzer, 128). Some gun rights advocates even go
so far as to portray the bureau as an organization
filled with agents whose real, if hidden, purpose is
to disarm the United States.
During the 1990s, the BATF was subject to
other conspiratorial accusations largely as a consequence of its involvement in the events at Ruby
Ridge in Idaho in 1991 and Waco, Texas, in 1993.
The BATF was the agency that entrapped Randy
Weaver into selling an illegal sawn-off shotgun to
one of its undercover informants in January 1991 in
the hope of turning Weaver into an informer
against the white-supremacist Aryan Nations
group. It was also the agency responsible for the
initial raid on the Mount Carmel complex on 28
February 1993 in an attempt to serve a search warrant on David Koresh, in which four BATF agents
and five Branch Davidians were killed. For much
of the Patriot movement, the actions of the BATF
(along with those of the FBI) at Ruby Ridge and
Waco were evidence of the dangerous and threatening militarization of U.S. law enforcement. They
were seen as pointing the way toward a planned

143

Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms

crackdown on the rights of gun owners and of dissident voices in the United States in general.
In the spring of 1995 there were widespread
rumors that BATF raids to arrest militia leaders
and other prominent Patriots were being planned
for 25 March. Although some Patriots such as
Linda Thompson of the American Justice Federation and “Acting Adjunct General” of the Unorganized Militia of the United States dismissed the
rumors as a hoax, others, including Jon Roland of
the Texas Constitutional Militia, and the publications the Spotlight and the Resister, regarded the
raids as the beginning of the federal government’s
planned oppression and a possible prelude to a
declaration of martial law throughout the United
States. Representative Steve Stockman wrote to
Attorney General Janet Reno with his concerns on
22 March. No BATF raid occurred, but another
person who responded to the rumors was Timothy
McVeigh; they were instrumental in convincing
McVeigh to carry out the Oklahoma City bombing
of 19 April 1995.
There are other, more specific conspiracy theories surrounding the BATF’s involvement with the
events at Waco. For example, Linda Thompson’s
video Waco II: The Big Lie Continues alleges that
three of the four BATF agents who died in the initial raid on Mount Carmel had been bodyguards to
President Clinton, and that these agents had been
shot “execution style” during the “cover” provided
by the raid in order to stop them from revealing
what they knew about his activities (Stern, 63).
Another conspiratorial explanation for the failure
of the initial raid on the Branch Davidians has been
posited by the Waco Holocaust Electronic
Museum. It regards the deaths of the four BATF
agents as a pretext to justify the subsequent siege
of the religious sect so that a national response plan
for a future military and police occupation of U.S.
society could be tested.
A Treasury Department report into the events at
Waco was highly critical of the BATF’s mishandling
of the initial raid and of misleading post-raid statements made by some of the bureau’s supervisors.
An investigation by Special Counsel John C. Danforth issued in November 2000 concluded that
144

government agents did not engage in a massive
conspiracy and cover-up at Waco.
One of the reasons why Timothy McVeigh chose
to bomb the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in
Oklahoma City was his hatred of the BATF, a hatred
that stemmed both from the agency’s role in enforcing America’s firearms laws and its specific involvement with events at Ruby Ridge and Waco.
McVeigh’s criteria for a potential “attack site” (Herbeck and Michel, 167) required that it be a government building housing at least two of three federal
law enforcement agencies from the BATF, FBI, and
the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA). The
Murrah Building contained the regional offices of
the BATF, the DEA, and—a “bonus” in McVeigh’s
view—the Secret Service (Herbeck and Michel,
167).
The BATF was one of the agencies responsible
for investigating the Oklahoma City bombing and
for securing the conviction of McVeigh and his
coconspirator Terry Nichols. Yet for many members of the Patriot movement and other conspiracists the BATF is itself implicated in the bombing.
Conspiracy theories expressed by many Patriot
groups contend that the BATF had prior warning
of the bombing, but chose not to do anything about
it, other than make sure that its own agents weren’t
in their offices at the time when the bomb (or
bombs) went off; that the bombing was a sting
operation that went wrong and which has been
subsequently covered up; and that McVeigh was a
BATF “patsy” being used as part of a larger plan to
use the bombing to oppress gun-owners, militia
members, and other Patriots.
D. J. Mulloy
See also: Federal Emergency Management Agency;
Oklahoma City Bombing; Ruby Ridge; Waco.
References
Danforth, John C. 2000. Final Report to the Deputy
Attorney General Concerning the 1993
Confrontation at the Mt. Carmel Complex, Waco,
Texas. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Department of the Treasury. 1993. Report of the
Department of the Treasury on the Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms Investigation of
Vernon Wayne Howell also known as David

Burr, Aaron

Koresh. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Herbeck, Dan, and Lou Michel. 2001. American
Terrorist: Timothy McVeigh and the Oklahoma
City Bombing. New York: Regan Books.
Kopel, David, and Paul H. Blackman. 1997. No
More Wacos: What’s Wrong with Federal Law
Enforcement and How to Fix It. Amherst, NY:
Prometheus Books.
Martinek, Wendy L., Kenneth J. Meier, and Lael R.
Keiser. 1998. “Jackboots or Lace Panties? The
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms.” Pp.
17–44 in The Changing Politics of Gun Control,
ed. John M. Bruce and Clyde Wilcox. Lanham,
MD: Rowman and Littlefield Publishing Inc.
Myers, Lawrence W. 1995. “‘Operation Achilles
Heel’: Exposing Allegations of Racism, Rape, and
Drug Abuse Among ‘Redneck Rogues’ in Federal
Law Enforcement.” Media Bypass. Vol. 3, No. 9
(Sept.): 18–27.
Skolnick, Sherman H. n.d. “U.S. Government
Complicity in the Oklahoma Bombing” in
Conspiracy Nation. Vol. 7, No. 44, available at
http://www.conspiracy-net.com/archives/articles/
conspiracy/conspnation/CN744.txt.
Spitzer, Robert J. 1998. The Politics of Gun Control.
2d ed. New York: Seven Bridges Press.
Stern, Kenneth S. 1997. A Force upon the Plain: The
American Militia Movement and the Politics of
Hate. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Websites
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms:
http://www.atf.treas.gov.
Waco Holocaust Electronic Museum. http://www.
mnsinc.com/SkyWriter/WacoMuseum/index.html.

Burr, Aaron
Since many of the conspirators burned much of the
evidence before the Aaron Burr treason trial in
1807, the Burr conspiracy has remained shrouded
in mystery. Although it may never be known exactly
what Burr was planning, or conspiring, in the West
in the early 1800s, sufficient evidence still remains
that supports the view that Burr, upset at the current demise of his political career, sought to instigate a rebellion in the newly acquired Louisiana
Territory with the aim of setting up a new empire
in which he could assume a leadership role.
Burr had a notable family history. His grandfather
was Colonial America’s noted Great Awakening

preacher, Jonathan Edwards. Burr’s father, Jonathan
Edwards the younger, was president of Princeton
University. Besides having an impressive lineage,
Burr was intelligent, talented, and ambitious. During the American Revolution, he served in the Continental Army. After the war, he studied law and
then later practiced in New York. Entering politics
in New York in 1789, he served in a variety of offices,
including state assemblyman, state attorney general,
and U.S. senator. Having assumed a position of
political prominence, he threw his hat in the ring in
the presidential election of 1800. The election
resulted in a tie, with Burr and Thomas Jefferson
winning seventy-three electoral votes each. At that
time, the United States Constitution stated that
whoever won the election would become president
and the candidate who came in second would become vice-president. After the election was deferred
to the House of Representatives, Burr was extremely disappointed, because Thomas Jefferson
won the race after Federalist Alexander Hamilton,
who felt that Jefferson was the least of the two
Republican evils, threw his support behind Jefferson. Vice-President Burr, well aware that Hamilton’s
political bargaining had been the deciding factor in
his failed bid for the presidency, developed a deep
resentment of Hamilton. In 1804, as Jefferson’s second presidential election was looming, Jefferson
rejected Burr as a running mate. Burr, still hoping to
stay in the political arena, ran for the governorship
of New York. However, after it became painfully
apparent that Hamilton had once again foiled Burr’s
political ambitions, Burr challenged Hamilton to a
duel. Most accounts say that Hamilton fired into the
air while Burr fired directly at his target, fatally
wounding Hamilton. Hamilton’s death signaled the
end of Burr’s political career, and it also led to indictments for murder in New York and New Jersey.
To Burr, in great debt and wishing to put himself
beyond the reach of the authorities, the recently
acquired Louisiana Territory seemed like the logical
place to run to. Burr was aware that many Federalists held the opinion that the Louisiana Territory had
been an illegal purchase by the United States,
because Napoleon Bonaparte, who had sold it, had
no power to do so. At the time of the transaction, the
145

Burr, Aaron

Aaron Burr. (Library of Congress)

territory was occupied by Spanish troops. It was not
until months after the sale that French troops briefly
took possession of the land. What is more, Napoleon
had acquired the land from Spain under an agreement that stated that, in return, he would give Tuscany to the son-in-law of Charles IV. Napoleon had,
in fact, never fulfilled his side of the bargain. Furthermore, Charles IV had secured a signed pledge
from Napoleon that the territory would never be
peacefully handed over to a third nation. Not only
was the purchase on shaky ground according to
many, but many Federalists also opposed it, because
they feared that the new territory would add southwest agricultural states to the union, which could
upset the political balance by diminishing political
power in the northeast industrial and commercial
states. Consequently, Burr felt that he could secure
sufficient support in the United States to support a
146

rebellion and ultimate separation of the Louisiana
Territory from the Union.
Upon reaching the West, Burr shared his vision
with an old friend, U.S. military commander General James Wilkinson. The meeting spurred Burr
on, and he secured a loan from a trusting wealthy
Irishman named Harman Blennerhassett, which
he used to purchase the Bastrop grant on the Ouachita River in Louisiana, which he intended to use
as a base of operations. Once physical preparations
had begun, Burr sought military support for his
plan as well. He began by appealing to British
agents to send the British Navy to help him blockade the port of New Orleans, but the British were
not interested in supporting Burr’s plan. In the
meantime, Burr was able to rally together a very
well equipped local army of about sixty men. Furthermore, in 1806, Burr traveled through Lexington, Kentucky, recruiting even more soldiers for his
army. Having secured a base and a small army,
Burr attempted to gain political support in the
United States. As it turned out, Burr’s political connections paid off, and General Wilkinson was
appointed governor of the Louisiana Territory.
Encouraged by recent events, Burr intensified his
appeals for support from Federalists and Republicans. Although many Federalists despised Jefferson’s administration and many Republicans regretted the Louisiana Purchase for political reasons,
very few of them felt that treason was justified. As
word of Burr’s requests spread, therefore, some citizens sent letters to Jefferson accusing Burr of treason, but none of these letters caught Jefferson’s
attention as much as the one sent by Governor
Wilkinson. Wilkinson, a secret agent for Spain, it
seems, had realized that Burr’s scheme was
doomed, because it lacked enough popular support, and he attempted to turn Burr in as a way of
separating himself from the conspiracy. Jefferson
wasted no time and ordered Burr’s arrest.
After getting word that Wilkinson had doublecrossed him, Burr began to dabble with the idea of
invading Mexico and creating a new republic, which
he could rule over as emperor. But Burr was
arrested as he attempted to flee to Florida. He was
promptly charged with treason by the grand jury,

Burroughs, William S.

and tried in Richmond, Virginia. Chief Justice John
Marshall, who was decidedly biased in Burr’s favor,
served as the presiding judge in the trial. Marshall’s
allegiance to Burr was made apparent when he
attended a dinner given by the chief defense team at
which Burr was present. On the other hand, Jefferson, who was adamantly in favor of Burr’s conviction, promised pardons to coconspirators willing to
testify against Burr. Marshall, in turn, made the conviction difficult by adopting a very rigid interpretation of treason, which required the testimony of two
credible first-hand witnesses of Burr’s treasonous
activities. In the end, Burr was acquitted of treason,
because the prosecution was unable to supply two
witnesses to the crime. After the trial, still being
sought for Hamilton’s murder, Burr borrowed some
money from friends and sailed to Europe. During
the next four years, he traveled through England,
Sweden, Denmark, Germany, and France seeking
support for his new plan to conquer Florida. Unable
to find willing partners or investors, Burr returned
to New York in 1812 to practice law and remained a
private citizen for the rest of his life.
Rolando Avila
See also: Hamilton, Alexander; Jefferson, Thomas.
References
Abernethy, Thomas Perkins. 1954. The Burr
Conspiracy. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kline, Mary-Jo, and Joanne Wood Ryan, eds. 1983.
Political Correspondence and Public Papers of
Aaron Burr. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Lomask, Milton. 1982. Aaron Burr: The Conspiracy
and Years of Exile, 1805–1836. New York: Farrar,
Straus, and Giroux.
McCaleb, Walter Flavius. 1936. The Aaron Burr
Conspiracy. New York: Wilson-Erickson.
Melton, Buckner F., Jr. 2001. Aaron Burr:
Conspiring to Treason. New York: John Wiley and
Sons, Inc.

Burroughs, William S.
Throughout the body of his work, the experimental
writer Burroughs presented conspiracies and conspiracy theories whose agents comprise right-wing
governments, fascist police, repressive medical and

psychiatric institutions, corporations and media conglomerates, parasitic mutants and aliens, and, perhaps most pervasive of all, language itself. Born in
St. Louis, Missouri, in 1914, Burroughs graduated
from Harvard University in 1936, and briefly
attended medical school in Vienna, Austria, and
later the Harvard graduate school of anthropology.
After a short service in the U.S. Army, Burroughs
moved to New York City where he became friends
with Allen Ginsberg and Jack Kerouac. Along with
other figures such as Gregory Corso and Lawrence
Ferlinghetti, this group would later be recognized—
despite their divergent writing styles—as the core of
the Beat literary movement. It was also in New York
that Burroughs met his wife Joan Vollmer Adams,
whom Burroughs later killed in an accidental shooting. It was this event, Burroughs would later say, that
motivated him to become a writer.
Burroughs was the grandson of W. S. Burroughs,
inventor of the Burroughs Adding Machine and
founder of what became the Burroughs Corporation. The Burroughs fortune provided the author
with a small stipend that allowed him, from 1948 on,
to live in Mexico City, Tangier, Paris, and London. As
much as Burroughs’s famous lifelong heroin use, this
extensive travel provided the subject matter and
inspiration for his work, which is characterized by a
frenetic, fantastical, and picaresque style of diverse
locations and time periods, along with science
fiction–influenced reimaginings of the past and the
present. Burroughs’s first novel, Junky (1953), was
published in his mid-thirties under the name of
William Lee. It is a first-person reportorial account
of his life as a junkie in New York, and displays little
of the stylistic experimentation that Burroughs
became famous for in Naked Lunch (1959). It does,
however, inaugurate his lifelong fascination with the
criminal underworld and his often “hardboiled” writing style. Published by the notorious Olympia Press,
Naked Lunch crystallized many of Burroughs’s surreal and sexually violent obsessions, such as young
boys ejaculating while being hanged, secret agents
and otherworldly organizations, and real and imagined drugs such as aquatic centipede meat and Mugwump jism. It also introduced Burroughs’s use of
“routines,” which were short, seemingly improvised
147

Burroughs, William S.

stories of a satirical, often grotesque nature. The
1962 publication of Naked Lunch in the United
States led to its being banned in Boston, Massachusetts, and a trial in which the novel was deemed
obscene, a decision that was later repealed.
After Naked Lunch, Burroughs began composing
novels using the cut-up method (also known as the
cut-up and fold-in method). Similar to a technique
proposed by the dadaist Tristan Tzara when he suggested he would write a poem by pulling words
from a hat, and later by Burroughs’s friend Brion
Gysin, the cut-up method involved splicing his own
writing as well as that of others into fragments, and
recombining the pieces to create a new text. Burroughs constructed a trilogy of novels using this
method, namely The Soft Machine (1961), The
Ticket that Exploded (1962), and Nova Express
(1964). Through the use of the cut-up method, the
regular intermixing of generic styles and dislocations of time, space, and subject, and the satirical
use of “routines,” Burroughs’s work was increasingly
concerned with overcoming and sometimes redeploying various modes of power and control. The
cut-up method served not only to make random
associations but to reveal hidden connections. Thus
it was not so much an effort toward schizophrenic
fragmentation but a surrealist and perhaps “paranoid” attempt to unmask the hidden meanings in
language. Critics have often read Burroughs’s work
as an attempt to escape a language that had been
taken over by corporate, governmental, and intergalactic forces. Drug addiction was reimagined as
“the junk virus” and Burroughs began to explore the
nature of addiction not merely to drugs, but to
images, causality, language, and power.
Questions of agency are frequently refigured as
narratives about “secret agents” in which characters are represented as agents of a particular organization or group, or simply as agents of the belief
system that has imprinted itself on them. These
agents infiltrate each other’s organizations, take on
disguises and then forget their original identities,
work as double or triple agents, and become
involved in conspiracies so obtuse that they are
often unsure for whom they are working. Burroughs’s representation of conspiracy regularly
148

extends to the phantasmagoric, in which the agents
of conspiracy are presented in biological terms, as
parasitic, viral, and insectile. The effect of such
conspiracies often involves the transformation of
humans into mutated organisms defined by their
particular addiction or group. The conflict between
various “controllers” and those who would be controlled recurs throughout Burroughs’s novels, such
as the alien conspiracy known as the Nova Mob,
and the Nova Police who struggle against them.
In the 1980s, Burroughs published an apocalyptic trilogy, made up of Cities of the Red Night
(1981), Place of Dead Roads (1984), and The Western Lands (1987). These utopian/dystopian fictions
thread together various story lines of gay pirate
utopias, Westerns, and Egyptian mythology. In
1991, The Naked Lunch was made into a film by
David Cronenberg, but as had become customary
by this time, the film dealt as much with the biography and mythology of Burroughs’s life as it did
the contents of his best-known novel. In a similar
fashion, Gus Van Sant had used the mythology of
Burroughs’s life in his film Drugstore Cowboy
(1989), in which Burroughs played a defrocked
junkie priest with a paternal relationship to the
lead protagonist.
Burroughs’s influence on the worlds of punk and
underground music was apparent from the 1970s
onward, with The Velvet Underground, David
Bowie, and Patti Smith, among others, citing him
as an important influence, and other bands taking
on names inspired by his books such as Steely Dan
and The Nova Conspiracy. Even the genre of
Heavy Metal was inspired by Burroughs’s literary
appropriation of the scientific category. In the
1990s, numerous musical collaborations were
released, further cementing his status as an underground icon and elder statesman of the counterculture. These releases included Dead City Radio
(1990), with collaborative tracks by John Cale and
Sonic Youth, a collaborative album with the Disposable Heroes of Hiphoprisy called Spare Ass
Annie and Other Tales (1993), and another with
Kurt Cobain, entitled The “Priest” They Called
Him (1992). In his final years, Burroughs wrote little, publishing My Education: A Book of Dreams

Bush, George

and Ghost of Chance in 1995, but he continued to
shotgun paint, exhibiting his works in the United
States and across Europe.
Tony Elias
See also: Corporations; Cronenberg, David; Drugs;
Mind Control; Paranoia; Pynchon, Thomas.
References
Grauerholz, James, and Ira Silverberg. 1998. Word
Virus: The William Burroughs Reader. New York:
Grove Press.
Morgan, Ted. 1988. Literary Outlaw: The Life and
Times of William S. Burroughs. New York: Avon.
Mottram, Eric. 1977. William Burroughs: The
Algebra of Need. London: Calder and Boyers.
Odier, Daniel. 1989. The Job: Interviews with
William S. Burroughs. New York: Penguin.

Bush, George
George Herbert Walker Bush served as the fortyfirst president of the United States from 1989 to
1993. Bush’s connections to groups ranging from the
Skull and Bones Society to the CIA have made him
a suspicious figure in the eyes of many conspiracy
theorists, but it was his declaration of an imminent
New World Order at the outset of the Gulf War that
gave him a central position in quasi-apocalyptic theories of the coming one-world government.
At the forefront of anti-Bush literature is the
Lyndon LaRouche group. LaRouche himself
strongly attacked Bush during the 1980 presidential campaign (and thereafter), and two of
LaRouche’s associates, Webster Tarpley and Anton
Chaitkin, have written an unauthorized version of
George Bush’s life that questions every aspect of
the former president’s official biography—including his supposed status as a war hero (Tarpley and
Chaitkin, 108ff). They suggest that any biographical sketch of Bush that mentions his arriving in
Texas in a red Studebaker—another story they
deem apocryphal—is merely a regurgitation of the
few authorized “facts” the Bush family has offered
the public. For the LaRouche group, Bush’s true
story involves connections to Nazi bankers, international cabals, the East Coast elite, and, generally,
“insiders” of all varieties.

Bush’s connections to the networks of power in
the United States are indeed stunning. He served
as U.S. permanent representative to the United
Nations from 1971 to 1973, as the first chief of the
U.S. Liaison Office in China from 1974 to 1975,
and as director of the CIA from 1975 to 1976. By
1979, Bush had become a member of the board of
the Council on Foreign Relations and a member of
the Trilateral Commission, in both groups (as well
as in his diplomatic capacity in China) dealing
closely with Henry Kissinger, a black mark indeed
as far as Bush’s so-called extremist critics are concerned. To this list one could add two more connections that raise red flags for conspiracy theorists: Bush’s membership in the Skull and Bones
Society while at Yale in the 1940s, and his membership (again along with Kissinger) in the
Bohemian Grove group that meets annually to perform “pagan rituals” in the forest north of San
Francisco.
In Bush’s first year as vice-president, John
Hinckley Jr. shot Ronald Reagan, and, as far as
some Bush critics are concerned, the peculiar circumstances surrounding the assassination attempt
seem to implicate Bush. In spite of the fact that
Hinckley had not yet been properly questioned,
officials almost immediately came to the conclusion that he had acted alone. Furthermore, no one
had yet investigated the fact that George Bush’s
son Neil was planning to have dinner with John
Hinckley Jr.’s brother Scott on the night following
the assassination attempt. This fact was not so
much covered up as it was completely ignored.
Also ignored, according to the LaRouche group, is
the fact that the Hinckley family were major contributors to George Bush’s presidential campaign.
These facts together are taken as evidence that
Hinckley may well have been a Manchurian Candidate, a product of the MK-ULTRA program that
was supposedly terminated by 1973, two years
before Bush became CIA director (Tarpley and
Chaitkin, 375ff). Hinckley’s parents recall notes
their son wrote while in prison that describe an
“imaginary conspiracy” to assassinate the president, but again the LaRouche group charges that
these notes have been wrongly suppressed.
149

Bush, George

George Bush, Sr., in 1990. (Downing Larry/Corbis Sygma)

world government. On 11 September 1990, George
Bush addressed Congress and announced the coming of “a New World Order” that would guarantee
unprecedented peace and prosperity through international cooperation. The LaRouche group and
others see this New World Order as nothing less
than universal slavery—the complete subjugation
of the rights of the individual (and of the individual
nation) in the face of a totalitarian international government (the UN as presently constituted is merely
the first step in this progression). More mainstream
journalists, of course, would see this New World
Order as a function of impersonal forces of globalization, rather than as the product of a conscious
Masonic world-conspiracy.
Even after leaving office, Bush has not ceased to
be the object of critique and speculation. Those
who depict Bush as having political power that is all
but supernatural in scope were offered another
spectacle that seemed to prove their theories in the
2000 presidential election. Bush’s son, George W.
Bush, became the forty-third president (they now
refer to each other in private as forty-one and fortythree) in spite of a noticeable lack of political savvy
and a complete lack of the foreign policy knowledge that marked his father’s political career. Even
mainstream journalists began to wonder whether
or not a vast right-wing conspiracy involving the
Supreme Court was behind the final result.
Marlon Kuzmick

While Reagan was recovering in the hospital—
and while Bush was in charge of the government—
an attempt was made on Pope John Paul II’s life.
Tarpley and Chaitkin imply that Bush may well
have had something to do with this, or at least with
a subsequent cover-up, writing: “It was as if a new
and malignant evil had erupted onto the world
stage, and was asserting its presence with an
unprecedented violence and terror” (380).
Bush was elected president in 1988, and soon
thereafter spoke the words that have made him the
bête noire of all those who suspect the “insiders” of
preparing to subject U.S. citizens to an evil one-

150

See also: Central Intelligence Agency; Iran-Contra;
Kissinger, Henry; Larouche, Lyndon; mk-ultra; New
World Order; Skull and Bones Society; Trilateral
Commission.
References
Fenster, Mark. 1999. Conspiracy Theories: Secrecy
and Power in American Culture. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Tarpley, Webster Griffin, and Anton Chaitkin. 1992.
George Bush: The Unauthorized Biography.
Washington, DC: Executive Intelligence Review.
Website
Executive Intelligence Review: http://www.
larouchepub.com.

C
Cambodia, Secret Bombing of
At the height of the Vietnam War U.S. bombers
were secretly ordered to bomb what were believed
to be strategic targets in neutral Cambodia. The
existence and extent of those missions were officially denied and covered up at the highest levels
for several years.
Cambodia emerged from French colonial rule in
1953 under the leadership of Prince–turned–Chief
of State Norodom Sihanouk. After cultivating an
alliance with the United States, Sihanouk broke off
formal relations. after ascertaining that the neighboring Republic of Vietnam (RVN) would eventually fall to Communists from North Vietnam and
insurgents within the nation itself. As a result, he
also turned a blind eye to Vietnamese Communists
who set up bases on Cambodian territory in order to
evade U.S. forces. For these concessions, Sihanouk
did not have to worry about Vietnamese forces aiding the small Communist Khmer Rouge insurgency
that was opposing his regime. In response to
Sihanouk’s lax border policy, beginning in 1966, U.S.
Special Forces and South Vietnamese Civilian Irregular Defense Group (CIDG) troops began engaging
in classified ground missions into Cambodia known
as Operation Daniel Boone.
On 9 February 1969, less than one month after
the inauguration of President Richard Nixon, General Creighton Abrams, commander of U.S. forces
in South Vietnam, related that the headquarters of
enemy forces operating in South Vietnam had been
located in the jungles of Cambodia. Abrams stated

that a U.S. attack on Central Office for South Vietnam base camps (COSVN HQ) would have a crippling effect on future Vietcong and North Vietnamese Army hostile actions in South Vietnam.
Abrams’s report, which came at a time when the
administration was already hinting to South Vietnam of a withdrawal of U.S. troops, seemed to provide a long-term military solution without additional ground troop involvement. Soon, Abrams
received word that his proposal was garnering serious consideration by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
that his message had been seen by President Nixon
himself. After five weeks of discussion and debate
in Washington, a plan was approved that called for
forty-eight sorties against COSVN HQ as well as
twelve strikes against targets within South Vietnam
that were nowhere near the true objective. The
actual target of the operation, code-named Breakfast, was to be concealed and treated as if it were
simply a standard bombing attack on enemy targets
in South Vietnam. Published information would
indicate that the bombing took place within the
RVN and, if questioned by the press about air
strikes in Cambodia, a U.S. spokesman would state
that sorties adjacent to the Cambodian border did
take place, that he had no other information on the
subject, and that he would look into the question.
Just before takeoff, the pilots and navigators of
the Strategic Air Command’s B-52 bombers executing Breakfast were told by their commanding officers that they would be bombing Cambodia, not
South Vietnam. During the night raid, the B-52s
151

Castro, Fidel

dropped their payloads into forty-eight separate
areas in the neutral nation of Cambodia. Daniel
Boone teams dispatched immediately following the
bombing, in order to capture supposedly dazed
enemy troops, found themselves under heavy fire,
providing the justification for future attacks on Cambodia. Over the next fourteen months, the Nixon
administration secretly authorized 3,630 raids, collectively known as Operation Menu, on fourteen
suspected North Vietnamese Army and Vietcong
bases inside the Cambodian border. Beginning in
May 1970, the U.S. Army and the Army of the
Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) launched a formal
ground invasion into the officially neutral nation of
Cambodia.
In 1973, the covert bombing raids were fully disclosed; however, both Nixon and Henry Kissinger
(who at the time of the bombing had been serving
as a National Security Affairs adviser) maintained
that the sorties were undertaken with the encouragement of President Sihanouk. They further
argued that the bombed areas were not inhabited
by Cambodians and were legitimate military targets. Now serving as secretary of state, Kissinger
stated the attacks were not a bombing of Cambodia
or its people per se, but of enemy troops located
within Cambodia. Yet, as early as April 1969, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff had informed the Nixon administration of considerable numbers of Cambodians
living within the COSVN HQ sanctuary areas.
As early as one week after the Breakfast mission,
the New York Times reported that Abrams had
requested air strikes against areas in Cambodia. On
9 May 1969, Pentagon correspondent William
Beecher stated that U.S. air raids against ammo
dumps and base camps in Cambodia had definitely
taken place. While the report sparked little appreciable public interest and no federal inquiries at the
time, the same account, four years later, generated
limited calls for impeachment. Further, Beecher’s
pronouncement prompted the Nixon administration to ask FBI Director J. Edger Hoover to ascertain how word of the bombing was leaked. The illegal FBI wiretaps placed on Kissinger’s assistant for
planning, Morton Halperin (the man suspected of
passing on the information), became the first of
152

Nixon’s abuses of power that came to be known collectively as the Watergate scandal.
Nicholas Turse
See also: Federal Bureau of Investigation; Hoover,
J. Edgar; Kissinger, Henry; Nixon, Richard;
Watergate.
References
Clodfelter, Michael. 1995. Vietnam in Military
Statistics: A History of the Indochina Wars,
1772–1991. Jefferson, NC: McFarland and
Company, Inc.
Kissinger, Henry A. 1991. “Bombing of Cambodia: A
Defense.” Pp. 284–294 in Light at the End of the
Tunnel: A Vietnam Anthology, ed. Andrew J.
Rotter. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Krepinevich, Andrew F. 1986. The Army and
Vietnam. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Shawcross, William. 1991. “Bombing of Cambodia:
A Critique.” Pp. 273–283 in Light at the End of
the Tunnel: A Vietnam Anthology, ed. Andrew J.
Rotter. New York: St. Martin’s Press.

Castro, Fidel
After seizing power in Cuba on 1 January 1959,
Fidel Castro quickly became America’s closest
enemy. He gradually introduced a Communist system on the island, just ninety miles from the United
States, nationalizing business and heavily repressing
opposition. Thousands fled to Florida and these
anti-Castro Cubans became the main source of
opposition to his rule within the United States.
Right-wingers, including businessmen who had had
property nationalized, also became vocal opponents
as Cuba increasingly became friendly with the
Soviet Union, culminating in the decision to put
nuclear missiles on the island.
The U.S. government pursued a number of plans
to unseat Castro, most notably the Bay of Pigs invasion on 17 April 1961. The plan was initiated by the
CIA under President Eisenhower, but it was his successor, John F. Kennedy, who approved it. A group
of 1,500 exiles landed on Cuba, but the Cuban army
quickly defeated them—Kennedy had refused to
authorize U.S. air support and the Cubans were
expecting the invasion as the exiles’ training had
been widely reported in the press. The failed inva-

Cattle Mutilations

Cuban Premier Fidel Castro gestures with his finger
while addressing U.N. General Assembly during his first
visit to the United States in nineteen years, 12 October
1979. (Bettmann/Corbis)

sion led to criticism of Kennedy from conservatives
and renewed pressure within the administration to
get rid of Castro. The president’s brother, Attorney
General Robert Kennedy, took charge of a new campaign to destabilize and/or assassinate the Cuban
leader. Operation Mongoose was launched in late
1961 and was a CIA-run plan to destabilize the
Cuban economy through acts of sabotage. There
were also attempts at assassinating Castro and suggestions of bizarre schemes such as poisoning Castro
to make his famous beard fall out.
In 1962, the pressure against Cuba came to a
head with the Cuban Missile Crisis. The nuclear
standoff between the United States and the Soviet
Union over Cuba led to a U.S. pledge of noninvasion that ultimately strengthened Castro’s position. However, the director of the CIA, Richard
Helms, later told the Church Commission in 1975
that the CIA had continued to plot against Castro
until 1965. It was unclear whether or not Kennedy

or Lyndon Johnson, his successor, knew about
these plans as Helms stated that he had acted on
presidential hints and felt no need to go into detail
with them.
The CIA and other parts of the intelligence community have also been accused of involvement in
the assassination of President Kennedy, partly
because of his perceived failings over Cuba. The
lack of air support for the Bay of Pigs invasion and
the non-invasion pledge following the Cuban Missile Crisis were seen as having provoked them into
orchestrating the assassination. Similarly, anti-Castro Cubans, including some then under training for
a future invasion, provided a possible source of
manpower to carry out any plan. This, however,
largely remains a source of speculation and,
indeed, Castro himself was widely seen as a probable sponsor of the assassination in the years immediately after it. The idea has lost credence, though,
as Castro was seemingly on the path to better relations with Kennedy and it is unlikely that he would
have preferred the more stringently anticommunist Johnson as president.
Neil Denslow
See also: Anticommunism; Bay of Pigs Invasion;
Cold War; Cuban Missile Crisis; Johnson, Lyndon
B.; Kennedy, John F., Assassination of.
References
Geyer, Georgie Anne. 2001. Guerrilla Prince: The
Untold Story of Fidel Castro. 3rd rev. ed. Kansas
City, MO: Andrews McMeel.
Hersh, Seymour. 1998. The Dark Side of Camelot.
London: HarperCollins.

Cattle Mutilations
When large numbers of cattle were found dead on
the Great Plains during the 1970s, many ranchers
and law enforcement officials refused to believe that
the deaths had come from natural causes. Alleging
that the animals had been weirdly mutilated—their
bodies drained of blood, and their sex organs
removed with so-called surgical precision—conspiracy theorists attributed the actions to one of three
outside forces. Satanic cults were suspected of
killing the cattle to obtain animal organs and blood
153

Cattle Mutilations

for their devil-worship ceremonies; extraterrestrial
aliens were suspected of killing the cattle to further
their understanding of terrestrial mammals; and
clandestine federal agencies were suspected of
killing the cattle as part of top-secret experiments in
chemical and/or biological warfare. Although nearly
every scientific report on this phenomenon has concluded that the deaths were perfectly natural, and
that the animals’ postmortem condition could be
attributed to the usual scavengers (e.g., coyotes,
badgers, vultures, crows, and blowflies), conspiracy
theorists have regarded these mundane explanations
as clumsy attempts to cover up the much more ominous sources of the cattle mutilations.
Interestingly, one of the first such mutilations was
not of a cow, but rather a horse named Lady (also
known as Snippy), a three-year-old Appaloosa that
was found dead on 9 September 1967 in southern
Colorado. Its heart and other internal organs were
missing, and its skin was stripped from the neck up;
but no blood could be detected on the ground
nearby, and neither footprints nor animal tracks
were found near the body. Local ranchers asked how
the heart could be removed without leaving at least
some trace of blood on the ground. If the culprits
were predators, why were there no teeth marks or
wounds with jagged edges? Just a few months earlier, there had been reports of strange lights in the
night sky, leading Lady’s owners to suspect that
aliens had been at work.
Over the next decade, reports of similar mutilations spread widely across the Great Plains, particularly in the states of Arkansas, Colorado, Kansas,
Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, and Oklahoma.
The total number of mutilations nationwide is
unknown, though estimates have ranged from several hundred to ten thousand. As a result, several
states began their own investigations, and the U.S.
Department of Justice provided funding for the
most exhaustive report, Operation Animal Mutilation, conducted in 1979–1980 for the state of New
Mexico by Kenneth Rommel, a retired agent from
the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Uncovering no evidence that satanists, aliens, or
covert federal agencies were at work, Rommel
found only natural explanations. The cows had died
154

from common viruses or other bovine diseases,
from eating poisonous plants, or perhaps even
from lightning. Because the dead animal might not
be found for a day or two, gas would build up in
their carcasses, causing not only the stretching of
tissue, but also the explosion of soft internal organs.
The animals’ blood would coagulate at the bottom
of the carcass, making it appear as if the blood had
been entirely drained. And as natural scavengers
from both air and land conducted their postmortem feasts, the surfaces left behind were surprisingly smooth, making it appear as if the work
had been done with surgical precision.
Needless to say, many conspiracy theorists have
refused to accept Rommel’s conclusions. The early
1970s were the years when allegations of satanic
cults became more widespread in the United States,
particularly in the wake of the murders committed
by Charles Manson and the Sons of Satan. It seemed
logical to connect the two phenomena. Satanists
were supposedly killing the animals so they could
continue to practice their ritual sacrifices. The blood
was drained so they could drink it, perhaps mixing it
with drugs to induce hallucinations. The sexual
organs were removed so they could use them for
copulation and other fertility rituals.
Speculation shifted from satanists to aliens in the
mid-1970s when crop circles were discovered in
fields not far from some of the mutilated cattle.
Again it seemed logical to connect the two phenomena, since the aliens’ use of UFOs would
explain why there were never any tracks left near
the scene, and the aliens’ advanced medical technology would explain why the mutilations appeared
to be performed with surgical precision. The alien
theory was given a significant boost by Linda Moulton Howe, a television journalist and former Miss
America contestant, who produced A Strange Harvest for national broadcast in 1980. In books and
subsequent television programs, Howe has continued to suggest that the aliens who are supposedly
abducting human beings and performing medical
probes on them are the same fiends who are mutilating cattle for similar experimentation.
Conspiracy theorists who favor the satanists have
one thing in common with those who favor the

Central Intelligence Agency

aliens: a belief that the federal government knows
the truth—and has even been closely monitoring
these activities—but is covering it up. Explanations
for the government cover-up vary, but other conspiracy theorists have attributed the cattle mutilations to the federal government itself. Troops and
military equipment were shifted following the
withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam in 1973 to
remote locations in the Great Plains and other
areas of the American West. The use of sophisticated military equipment, including the federal
government’s infamous black helicopters, would
explain how the cattle were mutilated without leaving any evidence behind. The U.S. government’s
campaign to develop biological and/or chemical
warfare would require testing these weapons
against the cattle found on nearby ranches. Why
the government would not simply purchase its own
cattle to conduct these top-secret experiments
remains a mystery.
James I. Deutsch
See also: Manson, Charles; Satanic Ritual Abuse;
UFOs.
References
Ellis, Bill. 1991. “Cattle Mutilation: Contemporary
Legends and Contemporary Mythologies.”
Contemporary Legend 1: 39–80.
———. 2000. Raising the Devil: Satanism, New
Religions, and the Media. Lexington: University of
Kentucky Press.
Hitt, Jack. 1997. “Operation Moo.” GQ: Gentlemen’s
Quarterly 67 (February): 152–159; 195–196.
Howe, Linda Moulton. 1989. An Alien Harvest:
Further Evidence Linking Animal Mutilations
and Human Abductions to Alien Life Forms.
Littleton, CO: Linda Moulton Howe Productions.
Rommel, Kenneth M., Jr. 1980. Operation Animal
Mutilation. Santa Fe: District Attorney, First
Judicial District, New Mexico. Also available at:
http://www.parascope.com/articles/0597/
romindex.htm.

Central Intelligence Agency
The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) occupies a
central place in U.S. conspiracy theory. In its efforts
to acquire intelligence relevant to U.S strategic
interests, the CIA has created a vast web of infor-

mation sources, from foreign double agents to the
most prestigious of U.S. universities, and this
expansive network offers the innumerable connections, coincidences, and causal links upon which
conspiracy theory thrives. Furthermore, the CIA’s
work has historically extended beyond mere intelligence gathering. In addition to espionage and counterespionage, the Agency undertook numerous
covert actions around the world, researched drugs
and behavioral modification (or “mind control”),
and even planned (and perhaps executed) the assassinations of foreign operatives and heads of state. As
the government agency charged with the duty of
secretly conspiring, the CIA has been involved in
numerous well-publicized conspiracies, and, consequently, has opened the door for ever greater flights
of fancy on the part of conspiracy theorists who see
CIA involvement everywhere. For along with the
many conspiracies with which the CIA has been
incontrovertibly linked, there are many more such
theories that are either fantasized or “not yet
proven,” depending on one’s point of view.
To be sure, the CIA has not been merely the passive target of conspiracy theory. As an organization,
the CIA seems to be constitutively structured by
paranoia—one cannot be a good spy without being
a little bit suspicious, after all. The cold war, in particular, produced a type of paranoia that seems different only in degree, rather than in kind, from that
of the anti-CIA conspiracy theorists that the Agency
routinely dismisses as crackpot extremists. The crucial difference between the CIA and the average
conspiracy buff, however, is that the former has the
power and the will to act on its theories.
The Beginning of the CIA
and Cold War Paranoia
The CIA was established by the National Security
Act of 1947. Very much a postwar operation, its
creation and structure bear the traces of U.S. reaction to World War II and the new political realities
generated by the war’s conclusion. Politicians were
especially wary of creating a secret police force;
with memories of the German Gestapo in mind,
the division between foreign intelligence (the CIA)
and domestic policing and investigation (the FBI)
155

Central Intelligence Agency

was believed to be crucial. Furthermore, there
were questions as to whether the CIA, a peacetime
organization, should be granted the same authority
as its wartime predecessor, the Office of Strategic
Services (OSS), when it came to subversive operations against foreign powers. The ability to execute
covert operations was effectively granted, however,
in the Central Intelligence Act of 1949, which gave
the director of Central Intelligence authority to
finance operations he deemed necessary, without
giving an account to Congress. In the end, of
course, the CIA’s involvement in botched covert
action abroad and surveillance at home was to
cause it great grief, particularly in the 1970s.
It soon became evident that the CIA’s major
antagonist was the Soviet Union, and the vast
majority of the Agency’s activities during the cold
war were linked to the Soviet threat in one way or
another. The CIA had become a major player in
America’s overall strategic posture during the cold
war. Since the United States could not compete
with the Soviet Union when it came to conventional warfare—the Soviets’ advantage when it
came to sheer manpower was insurmountable—
U.S. defense strategy involved nuclear deterrence
combined with covert action by the CIA. The CIA
thus became a major player in global politics, and
both the CIA and the KGB tended to see their
adversary’s conspiring hands behind every event.
Sometimes, this was indeed the case, as when in
elections such as Italy’s in 1948 the CIA and the
Communists financed opposing candidates. The
structure of this type of secret warfare lends itself
to paranoia, and the CIA’s responses to the Soviet
threat often seem to have been as infected with
delusional paranoia as any of the conspiracy theories the CIA routinely dismisses as irrational or
extremist.
Covert Operations
No doubt one of the reasons for the CIA’s prominence in so many conspiracy theories is the fact
that conspiracy is one of the CIA’s key jobs—
“covert action” is the term for this particular job,
and, at times, the CIA has done it rather well.
Though the Agency always ensures that it main156

tains “plausible deniability,” its actions are often
discovered after the fact.
In August 1953, for example, the Iranian government of Prime Minister Mohammed Mosaddeq
was overthrown and an imperial government, led
by the Shah, was set up. Former CIA agents claim
that the coup was engineered by the small force of
five Agency officers secretly ensconced in a Tehran
basement with $1 million in funds as their sole
weapon (used to organize paid street mobs among
other things). This particular CIA conspiracy managed to keep the vast oil resources of Iran from
being nationalized, securing the strategically
important energy for the West, and gaining U.S. oil
companies (Gulf, Standard, Texaco, and Mobil) a
healthy share of Iranian oil rights.
This pattern was to repeat itself elsewhere. In
Guatemala in 1954, the CIA helped to overthrow a
democratically elected president, Jacobo Arbenz
Guzman, replacing him with a dictator, Colonel
Carlos Castillo Armas. The CIA’s involvement in
the coup helped the United Fruit Company immensely, as that company feared that the new government might cut down on their Guatemalan
profits. In 1970, the democratically elected leader
of Cambodia, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, was
deposed and replaced with the pro-American Marshal Lon Nol. In September 1973, revolutionary
forces assisted by the CIA overthrew the socialist
government of Chile and killed the country’s democratically elected leader, Salvador Allende.
Of course, not all attempted covert operations
were successful. Attempted coups in Indonesia in
1958 and North Vietnam in 1954 did not proceed as
planned, and the Bay of Pigs invasion in April 1961
was an utter failure. Most disastrously for the CIA,
the Bay of Pigs fiasco gained much more press than
any of the Agency’s successes (for obvious reasons).
This negative publicity led to an increase in CIArelated conspiracy theories and an overall depreciation in the Agency’s international prestige. Also
diminishing the CIA’s international reputation were
rumors of numerous assassination plots the Agency
had hatched, if not actually executed, throughout
the years. Allegations that the CIA had a hand in
Che Guevara’s death have never been proven

Central Intelligence Agency

beyond doubt, but the CIA’s explorations of plans to
assassinate Cuban leader Fidel Castro, Dominican
Republic dictator Rafael Leonidas Trujillo, and
Patrice Lumumba of the Congo are now well known
(Jeffreys-Jones, 96ff).
In time, critics began to charge that the CIA was
expending too much of its resources on covert
action at the expense of intelligence, which was,
after all, its primary purpose. Furthermore, public
distaste for the sorts of regimes the CIA tended to
support created great controversy. Ultimately,
President Gerald Ford claimed that the CIA
should use covert action only to support wellestablished democracies and banned assassination
completely.
Behavior Modification
One could argue that the CIA’s own “paranoia” lay
behind the Agency’s extensive research into behavioral modification. Faced with phenomena such as
the Communist show trials and the confessions
signed by U.S. prisoners of war in Korea (in both
cases individuals seemed brainwashed into confessing to crimes they did not commit), the CIA
became convinced that the Soviets had developed
mind-control techniques, and thus that the United
States had better develop these same techniques as
a matter of national security.
In Projects Artichoke, MK-ULTRA, and MKSEARCH, the latter two under the leadership of the
now infamous Sidney Gottlieb, the CIA investigated the operational potential of marijuana, LSD,
hypnosis, sensory deprivation, electroshock therapy,
and even, more surprisingly, parapsychological possibilities such as telekinesis, precognition, and
telepathy. In one experiment, Project Artichoke
head Morse Allen hypnotized two of his secretaries
and commanded one to shoot the other with a
nearby pistol. The secretary took the unloaded gun
and pulled the trigger. These experiments within
the Agency were quite common, with MK-ULTRA
agents at one point agreeing to slip each other LSD
at any time to observe its effects when administered
by surprise. Ultimately, however, it was obviously
more desirable to get test-subjects from the outside
world, particularly for those experiments that the

CIA agents wouldn’t dare perform on themselves.
On one front, the CIA began to fund research in
universities and drug treatment programs. In some
such programs mental patients were kept on daily
doses of LSD for up to seventy-seven consecutive
days. On another front, the CIA continued itself to
perform experiments on unwitting subjects, now
luring prostitutes and small-time criminals back to
apartments in which they would be slipped the drug
and observed. Ultimately, in Operation Midnight
Climax, the prostitutes were recruited and offered
cash to lure clients back to the apartments, where
the CIA could perform drug experiments and also
collect information on “perverse” sexual practices
that might later have operational value.
The CIA was clearly exceeding its authority in
performing these operations on domestic soil, and,
as the facts of these experiments slowly leaked out,
those who believed the CIA to be nothing but an
insidious, control-oriented conspiracy of sorts were
provided with ample proof of their theories.
From JFK to the Senate Inquiry—
the Rising Tide of Public Suspicion
In 1967 Jim Garrison, the New Orleans district
attorney, launched his own investigation into the
assassination of President John F. Kennedy. Not
satisfied with the Warren Commission’s inquiry
two years earlier, Garrison was convinced that the
assassination had been a conspiracy, that Oswald
was not the lone gunman. Garrison charged New
Orleans businessman Clay Shaw with masterminding the plot, but as the investigation wore on, it
became clear that Garrison believed more powerful forces lay behind the tragic series of events—
specifically, the CIA and the “military-industrial
complex.” Answering conspiracy theory with conspiracy theory, the CIA began to entertain the possibility that Garrison was in league with the KGB.
And even today, according to an extensive article
published in its own intelligence journal, the
Agency suspects that the supposed link between
the CIA and the JFK assassination was itself the
result of an extensive Communist disinformation
operation involving socialist-leaning newspapers
from Rome to Canada (see Holland).
157

Central Intelligence Agency

Even if Garrison was merely, in the words of a
pro-CIA historian, “a mendacious district attorney
adept at manipulating the Zeitgeist of the late 60s”
(Holland), it was a sign of things to come for the
CIA. The 1970s saw a wave of stunning revelations
concerning the CIA’s activities at home and abroad
(including the covert operations and behavioral
modification programs mentioned above). A series
of high-profile government inquiries kept the CIA
on the front pages for years: the Commission on
CIA Activities Within the United States in 1975
(“The Rockefeller Commission”); the Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with
Respect to Intelligence Activities (“The Church
Commission”); the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence’s hearings on the MK-ULTRA program in
1977; and the 1979 report of the House Select
Committee on Assassinations. These hearings—the
transcripts of which are publicly available—provided key information for historians and conspiracy
buffs alike. Furthermore, the sheer strangeness of
many of the stories contributed to the general
belief that the CIA was capable of anything, and,
thus, expanded the possible range of CIA-related
conspiracy theory. The public discovered that the
CIA wanted to cause Castro’s beard to fall out,
assuming that this would rob him of his powerful
“machismo.” The Agency also considered soaking
one of his cigars in LSD. They dreamed up schoolboy antics like stink bombs and diarrhea stimulation as ways of embarrassing foreign leaders. Even
animals were not safe—CIA-funded scientists performed lobotomies on apes and stuck them in sensory deprivation chambers; they cut the heads off of
monkeys, attempting to surgically attach them to
other monkeys; agents even trained dolphins to
attack enemy divers with large hypodermic needles
armed with compressed air containers. The hyperbolic strangeness of these activities seemed to
invite the public to come up with ever wilder conspiracy theories.
Proliferating Conspiracy Theories
As CIA activities became more widely publicized, it
became easier and easier for foreign politicians to
accuse the CIA of meddling. CIA involvement in the
158

deposition of Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia, for instance, has been disputed, but the book
Sihanouk wrote in exile, My War with the CIA,
found a receptive audience because the CIA’s known
activities made the Sihanouk scenario seem quite
likely. To be fair, the CIA has a difficult time defending itself, since most of its documents are classified;
furthermore, even when it releases documents, large
sections are invariably blacked out, leading to ever
greater suspicion on the part of the reader.
As the keeper of the country’s deepest secrets,
the CIA is inevitably implicated in a whole host of
“unexplained” phenomena and wild suspicions. The
CIA, founded the same year of the supposed alien
landing in Roswell, New Mexico, has been accused
both of covering up the existence of extraterrestrial
life and of having manufactured UFO hysteria as a
“tool for cold war psychological warfare” (Haines).
While MK-ULTRA as a project is in the past, theories
about CIA mind control have reinvented themselves for the twenty-first century, with some arguing that the CIA is secretly implanting microchips
inside human bodies (often in the skull) as a way of
tracking and controlling individuals.
Both at home and abroad, the CIA has become
a wonderfully useful subject for conspiracy theorists, capable of connecting what is seemingly
unconnected, of explaining the unexplained (in
Hollywood today its use as such is prevalent to the
point of cliché). And with its increasing budget,
power, and overall significance following the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, the proliferation of CIA-related conspiracy theories shows no
signs of abating.
Marlon Kuzmick
See also: Anticommunism; Bay of Pigs Invasion;
Castro, Fidel; Cold War; Kennedy, John F.,
Assassination of; LSD; The Manchurian Candidate;
MK-ULTRA; Pentagon Papers.
References
Haines, Gerald K. 1997. “A Die Hard Issue: CIA’s
Role in the Study of UFOs, 1947–90.” Studies in
Intelligence. Semiannual edition no. 1: http://
www.cia.gov/csi/studies/97unclass/ufo.html#ft12.
Holland, Max. 2001. “The Power of Disinformation:
The Lie that Linked CIA to the Kennedy
Assassination.” Studies in Intelligence 11 (fall-

Chambers, Whittaker

winter): http://www.cia.gov/csi/studies/
fall_winter_2001/article02.html.
Jeffreys-Jones, Rhodri. 1998. The CIA and American
Democracy. 2d ed. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Marks, John. 1979. The Search for the Manchurian
Candidate: The CIA and Mind Control. London:
Penguin.
Website
George Washington University, National Security
Archive: http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/
NSAEBB/.

Chambers, Whittaker
Whittaker Chambers was one of the most important and controversial witnesses used by prosecutors in their postwar campaign to root out Communists and leftists suspected of infiltrating President
Roosevelt’s New Deal government in the 1930s and
1940s. Chambers’s single most significant act was to
testify at length against his former friend, prominent State Department official Alger Hiss. He also
appeared frequently before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) to corroborate
the accusations of fellow anticommunist witnesses
such as Elizabeth Bentley, Benjamin Gitlow, Louis
Budenz, and Hede Massing.
From Communist to Anticommunist
Chambers was born in Brooklyn in 1901. Chambers’s parents (a commercial artist and cartoonist)
did not enjoy a happy marriage. Not long after his
father’s early death (and his brother’s suicide),
Chambers ran away to Washington, D.C., where he
worked as a laborer on the railways. A gifted but
erratic student, he would eventually enter Columbia University and study under the celebrated
English instructor Mark Van Doren, but it was his
experience during the earlier period, and his reading of Marx and Lenin, that brought Chambers into
contact with several key members of the Communist Party (CPUSA), including future general secretary William Foster, James Cannon, and Joseph
Freeman. Looking back on his decision to join the
party in 1925 from the perspective of his compelling 1953 autobiography, Witness, Chambers

claimed that he had found in Marxism a “practical
program, a vision, and a faith” with which to answer
the “crises of history” unfolding around him.
Throughout the “red decade” (late 1920s–1930s),
Chambers enjoyed swift progress up the ranks first
of the open party and then the underground Soviet
espionage apparatus that coordinated and directed
its actions. In 1935, he was appointed to the prestigious position of chief editor of the CPUSA’s Daily
Worker. Ironically, it was from this privileged perspective that Chambers began to discern the corruption of Communist ideals that would finally lead
to his apostasy from the movement in 1937–1938.
In common with contemporaries and fellow
McCarthyites like Gitlow, Bentley, and Austrian
expatriate Arthur Koestler, Chambers’s faith in the
Left was destroyed as a result of the Stalinist purges
in the USSR, the Nazi–Soviet pact, and the resulting internecine warfare among members of the
U.S. Left.
Although the exact date of his disengagement
from the movement remains uncertain, it is clear
that, from the late 1930s, Chambers had begun
secreting microfilms and documents that he would
eventually use to expose the treachery of former
Communist comrades embedded within various
branches of the Roosevelt and Truman administrations. Throughout the 1940s, Chambers, as a former highly placed member of the Communist
underground, was increasingly called on by the
FBI to corroborate the charges of other defectors.
As a result of this process, he came to believe that
Roosevelt’s liberal New Deal program (and its successor, Truman’s “Fair Deal”) had been thoroughly
compromised by the penetration of Communist
ideas and personnel. Like other proponents of
McCarthyism such as FBI director J. Edgar
Hoover, future president Richard Nixon, Senator
Patrick McCarran, and McCarthy himself, Chambers viewed the New Deal as little more than a
covert socialist revolution led by an elite of leftist
intellectuals masquerading as liberals. Together
with the written and verbal pronouncements of
these and other figures, Chambers’s testimony, in
Witness and before numerous grand juries and
congressional committees, and his many articles
159

Chambers, Whittaker

Whittaker Chambers leaving federal court, 18 November
1949. (Library of Congress)

for magazines like Time, were instrumental in identifying the formative influence of Communist
thought on the drift of pre-war public policy and
the threat of Communist conspiracy in the cold war
public consciousness.
The Hiss-Chambers Trials
Chambers’s single most crucial act, however, was to
detail Alger Hiss’s activities on behalf of the Soviet
intelligence apparatus during his appointment in the
State Department and his participation at the pivotal superpower conference in Yalta at the end of
World War II. From his first appearance before
HUAC in August 1948 when Hiss was accused of
membership in the CPUSA, Chambers maintained
the pressure on his former friend. From 1948–1950,
he doggedly continued the campaign in spite of
Hiss’s denial that he had ever known his accuser, and
the charges of slander Hiss brought against him.
Indeed, it was in his pretrial deposition during the
160

latter case that Chambers unexpectedly broadened
his allegations, accusing Hiss of stealing State
Department documents and passing them to him
for transmission to Moscow. It was these documents,
stored by Chambers among the produce at his
Maryland farm, which became popularly known as
the “Pumpkin Papers.” Although this first trial
ended in a hung jury, a conviction was finally
secured when professional ex-communist witness
Hede Massing appeared at the retrial the following
year to corroborate Chambers’s claim. Hiss was sentenced to five years in prison.
Coinciding with the 1949 trial of the CPUSA
leadership by HUAC, the Hiss–Chambers case captivated the public imagination and occupied far
more column inches than any other in the years
before the Rosenberg scandal (1952–1954). This
was undoubtedly due in part to the impressive and
apparently unimpeachable record of the accused
and the entire network of officials whom he seemed
to represent—in the words of one contemporary
commentator, the case effectively put the New
Deal generation on trial. No less important was the
fact that several of the key hearings were televised
nationwide, something unprecedented in the
1950s. For the most part, Chambers appeared temperamentally ill-suited to such widespread exposure, as his retreat to a solitary life on the remote
Maryland farm proved. Nevertheless, after the
furor died down, he continued to work as an editor
and staff writer for Time and Life magazines and the
National Review; examples of his provocative,
always opinionated reflections on cold war politics
were recently anthologized in Ghosts on the Roof
(1996). Chambers died of a heart attack in 1961,
having renewed his pledge to the Quaker faith of
his childhood. As Witness makes clear, it was this
return of the spiritual dimension to his life that
offered a sustaining counterweight to the trauma of
his apostasy from the Communist movement.
Continuing Controversy over
Chambers’s Legacy
By the time of his death Chambers’s life and its
legacy were already the subject of bitter debate.
For the cold war conservative constituency, many of

Chambers, Whittaker

whom, like Philip Rahv and Leslie Fiedler, shared
their hero’s leftist past, Chambers represented the
acceptable, literate face of uncompromising anticommunism, without any of McCarthy’s demagoguery. (It is worth noting that Chambers privately
condemned McCarthy’s bullying courtroom tactics.) Richard Nixon, another powerful conservative
supporter and key prosecutor in the Hiss trials,
would later admit that his close involvement in the
development of Chambers’s case helped secure the
broad base of support for his presidential campaigns against John F. Kennedy in 1960 and Robert
Kennedy in 1968. Indeed, the very principles of the
so-called New Right that began to surface during
the 1950s were premised on the same rejection of
the reformist social agenda advocated by the liberal
establishment under Roosevelt and Truman that
had actuated Chambers’s assault on Hiss. Another
beneficiary of this growing tide of right-wing sentiment was Californian Republican Ronald Reagan,
who, as president, awarded Chambers a posthumous Medal of Freedom in 1984, citing him as a
bastion of “virtue and freedom” against the “brooding terrors of [the] age.” Both Reagan and Nixon, as
well as National Review founder William Buckley,
were all at one time members of the so-called
Pumpkin Papers Irregulars, a group formed with
the sole aim of maintaining Chambers’s esteemed
reputation in conservative political and cultural circles. No less significant in this regard was Allen
Weinstein’s much-lauded (and recently republished) study of the case, Perjury (1978; 1997), in
which, after a judicious inquiry into all available
sources, and starting from his strong belief in Hiss’s
innocence, the author concluded that the vast
majority of Chambers’s accusations were true. The
support of these prominent figures seemed justified
when, in the late 1990s, Soviet archives were
opened and many files from the Venona Project
were declassified. Suddenly, there was an abundance of evidence apparently proving that Chambers had been correct both in his assertion that Hiss
was a Soviet agent and that a Communist conspiracy had successfully penetrated many departments
of the Roosevelt administration and continued
unimpeded during Truman’s presidency.

In the face of this torrent of hostility and accusation, Hiss continued to maintain his innocence. In
this, he had many powerful supporters among liberals and former government officials who were
not prepared to see the very real political and social
gains made during the Roosevelt era tainted and
compromised by the accusation of Communist
infiltration. In fact, the backlash against Chambers
had already begun during the trials when Hiss and
various sections of the media joined forces to portray Chambers as a psychopath and habitual liar.
Whatever the truth of this diagnosis, for someone
like future Kennedy special advisor Arthur
Schlesinger, Jr., or a liberal commentator like
Granville Hicks, Chambers’s rigid view of the irreconcilable conflict between left and right was far too
absolute, leaving at the center a dangerous breeding ground for intolerance and extremism. For
those further to the left, including the CPUSA and
the Socialist Workers’ Party, the growing convergence of interests among figures like Chambers,
Nixon, and McCarthy began to resemble a neoconservative conspiracy whose aim was to discredit the
New Deal establishment and those who came
under the banner of its Popular Front during the
1930s. In their view, Hiss, like the Rosenbergs a
few years later, came to represent a scapegoat used
to legitimize the ascendancy of the New Right. The
validity of this argument seemed finally to have
been borne out when Soviet intelligence archivist
General Dmitri Volkogonov claimed in 1992 that
he had found no evidence in the KGB’s cold war
files to prove Chambers’s allegations against Hiss.
However, more revelations from the archives and
the Venona files have further complicated the issue
and once again tipped the balance in favor of
Chambers’s account. In recent years, The Heritage
Foundation, a Washington-based right-wing think
tank, celebrated the centenary of Chambers’s birth
with a glowing tribute to a “man of courage and
faith,” while the conservative-inclined Regnery
Publishing house has continued its long-term project to bring his huge body of political and cultural
journalism to a wider public. What this proves is
that Chambers’s contested legacy continues to
reflect the shifts of public and political estimation
161

Chappaquiddick

of the significance of the threat of Communist subversion and conspiracy during the cold war.
Dorian Hayes
See also: Anticommunism; Atomic Secrets; Cold
War; Federal Bureau of Investigation; House UnAmerican Activities Committee; Hiss, Alger; Venona
Project.
References
Chambers, Whittaker. 1953. Witness. London:
Deutsch.
———. Ghosts on the Roof: Selected Essays. 1996.
Edited by Terry Teachout. Washington, DC:
Regnery Publishing.
Cooke, Alistair. 1950. A Generation on Trial: USA
vs. Alger Hiss. New York: Knopf.
Fiedler, Leslie. 1950. “Hiss, Chambers, and the Age
of Innocence.” In An End to Innocence: Essays
on Culture and Politics. Boston, MA: Beacon.
Haynes, John Earl, and Harvey Klehr. 1999. Venona:
Decoding Soviet Espionage in America. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Kristol, Irving. 1952. “‘Civil Liberties, 1952’: A
Study in Confusion.” Commentary 13 (March):
228–236.
Tannenhaus, Sam. 1997. Whittaker Chambers. New
York: Random House.
Weinstein, Allen. [1978] 1997. Perjury: The HissChambers Case. New and rev. ed. New York:
Random House.
Websites
The Heritage Foundation: http://www.heritage.org/
library/execmemo/em735.html.
New York Times Archives: http://www.nytimes.
com/books/97/03/09/970309.09schlest.html.

Chappaquiddick
On the night of 18 July 1969, Mary Jo Kopechne
died when the car in which she was riding plunged
off a low bridge on the Massachusetts island of
Chappaquiddick and landed on its roof in the water
below. Senator Edward M. Kennedy reported to
local police the following morning that he had been
driving the car at the time of the accident. Charged
with leaving the scene of an accident, he pleaded
guilty and was given a suspended sentence. A coroner’s inquest into Kopechne’s death held in January
1970 and a subsequent grand jury investigation held
in March of that year produced no new legal devel162

opments. The last official result of the case was the
revocation of Kennedy’s driver’s license in May
1970 after a routine fatal-accident investigation by
the Registry of Motor Vehicles. The hearing examiner, like the judge who had sentenced Kennedy,
concluded that he had been driving too fast.
Kennedy made no public statement until the
week following the accident, when he spoke in a
live television broadcast from his home. He stated
in that broadcast, and has maintained ever since,
that he was driving (but not intoxicated) on the
night of the accident and that after the car went into
the water he made vigorous (but unsuccessful)
efforts to rescue Kopechne. All conspiracy theories
about the accident reject this version of events. The
theories fall into three groups that allege, respectively, a conspiracy to place blame on Kennedy, a
conspiracy to divert blame from Kennedy, and a
conspiracy to cover up an earlier crime by staging
the “accident.”
The Setting and the Accident
The island of Martha’s Vineyard lies seven miles off
the southeastern coast of Massachusetts. It is
divided into six towns, of which Edgartown (at the
far eastern end of the island) is the oldest, largest,
and most visibly prosperous. Chappaquiddick,
where the accident took place, is a political and cultural appendage of Edgartown. Functionally an
island itself, it is separated from Edgartown proper
by a 500-foot-wide channel crossed by a small,
bargelike car ferry. The eastern edge of Chappaquiddick is a long, straight ocean beach backed
by a narrow body of water known as Poucha Pond.
Dyke Bridge, the site of the accident, arches over
the pond, connecting Chappaquiddick’s small road
system to the parking lot behind the beach. The
bridge (since demolished and rebuilt) angled 27
degrees to the left of the road leading to it. It had,
in 1969, only 4-inch strips of timber to mark the
edges of its deck.
Kennedy and Kopechne—a former member of
Senator Robert F. Kennedy’s staff—arrived separately at a party held at a rented cottage on Chappaquiddick on the night of 18 July. Leaving the cottage together shortly before 12:45 A.M., they drove

Chappaquiddick

north in a black 1967 Oldsmobile 88 toward Chappaquiddick’s main intersection. A left turn at the
intersection, following Chappaquiddick’s sole paved
road, would have taken them to the ferry landing—
their intended destination, according to Kennedy.
Instead, upon reaching the intersection, they turned
right onto the gravel road leading to Dyke Bridge
and the beach beyond. Deputy Sheriff Christopher
Look, a Chappaquiddick resident on his way home,
reached the intersection at the same time and witnessed the turn. Moments later, the car carrying
Kennedy and Kopechne reached the bridge and
failed to negotiate it. Traveling at 20–25 miles per
hour, it jumped the low guard rails and ran off the
right side of the bridge, hitting the water on its right
side and rolling inverted as it sank into 8–10 feet of
water. Kennedy, apparently washed out of the car by
the in-rushing water, escaped. Kopechne, trapped as
the car rolled over, drowned.
Conspiracy to Blame Kennedy
Heir to the greatest political dynasty in twentiethcentury U.S. history, Edward Kennedy was considered a strong contender for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1972. The accident effectively
ended his chances of winning the nomination, and
he announced in 1970 that he would not run. Conspiracy theorists of the political Left speculated, as a
result, that the “accident” had been staged by agents
of the Right to achieve precisely that goal. Kennedy,
according to this theory, was kidnapped, drugged,
placed in the car with Kopechne, and pushed off the
bridge—leaving him (if he survived) to explain why
he was headed for a deserted beach at midnight with
a woman who was not his wife. Allegations of rightwing involvement in the assassinations of President
John F. Kennedy in 1963 and leading presidential
candidate Robert F. Kennedy in 1968 lent a measure of plausibility to such theories. So, after 1973,
did revelations that the Nixon administration had
employed “dirty tricks,” some of them illegal, against
its political enemies.
Few believers in a right-wing framing of Kennedy
have developed the theory in depth. The principal
exception is R. B. Cutler, 1973 whose self-published
book You, The Jury outlines a complex scenario

involving three separate groups of agents and a
Kennedy look-alike used as a temporary decoy. Cutler’s book blames the framing on unspecified individuals or organizations determined to bar Kennedy
from the presidency. Richard Nixon, his aides, and
his sympathizers are never named as coconspirators,
but readers are left free to infer their involvement.
The limited popularity of frame-up theories
about the accident is due in part to their fundamental implausibility. Why, critics reasonably ask,
would Kennedy not protest that he was being
framed? Why would he plead guilty before a local
judge the week after the accident? Why would he
publicly admit guilt in his televised speech later the
same day? Why, in other words, would Kennedy do
the conspirators’ work for them by confessing to a
reputation-damaging act that he knew he did not
commit?
Conspiracy to Shield Kennedy
The most widely held conspiracy theories about
the accident propose that Kennedy conspired with
others to cover up the true extent of his guilt. Their
popularity reflects the widespread sentiment that
the wealthy, the powerful, and the well-connected
can easily escape punishment for their crimes. The
Kennedy family possessed wealth, power, and connections in abundance, and their willingness to use
all three to their advantage is well established. The
perceived incongruity of crime and punishment in
the Chappaquiddick case—a two-month suspended sentence for acts resulting in the death of
a young woman—led many to conclude that wealth
and privilege had triumphed again. These perceptions ran especially strong among longtime residents of Martha’s Vineyard, fueled by suspicion of
wealthy, privileged vacationers from the mainland.
One variation of this theory has Kennedy conspiring with associates to craft an “official” story
about the accident that would minimize his guilt.
Washington Post columnist Jack Anderson suggested in 1969, for example, that Kennedy asked
Joseph Gargan and Hugh Markham—two longtime associates who were also at the party—to lie
to police and say that Gargan or Kopechne herself
had been at the wheel of the car. Leo Damore gave
163

Chappaquiddick

the theory new life in his 1988 book Senatorial
Privilege. Many residents of Martha’s Vineyard see
evidence of a similar conspiracy in Kennedy’s
claims that he turned toward the bridge without
realizing it, dived on the wreck in an effort to save
Kopechne, and later swam the channel separating
Chappaquiddick from Edgartown. They believe
that the claims are patently absurd—a heroic fiction created by Kennedy and others to cover an
uglier reality in which Kennedy, drunk, fled the
scene of the accident and used his connections to
slip back quietly to his Edgartown hotel without
rousing the ferryman and attracting attention.
A second variation of the theory suggests that the
Kennedy family used their wealth, power, or political connections to subvert, divert, or obstruct official
investigations of the accident. Commentators who
believe in such a conspiracy argue that the postaccident investigations were inadequate at best and negligent at worst—failings best explained not by disinterest but by active tampering. Why, they ask, did
the Edgartown police not thoroughly search the
area around the accident scene for telltale physical
evidence? Why did the state police lieutenant who
headed the investigation for the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts fail to question key witnesses and discourage the district attorney from ordering an
autopsy? Why did the judge in charge of the grand
jury investigation set the ground rules in such ways
that virtually guaranteed it would be ineffective?
The slipshod investigation and prosecution were,
they argue, orchestrated by Kennedy and others in a
series of phone calls made in the time between the
accident and the first report of it to the police. The
extent of the family’s power over Massachusetts politics made it possible for them to quickly and efficiently subvert the criminal justice system.
Theories about conspiracies to conceal the
nature of Kennedy’s offense and deflect the full
force of the law from him are the least spectacular
of the three types. They are also the most plausible:
the investigation was, in retrospect, seriously
flawed. Conspiracy-theory critics such as James
Lange and Katherine DeWitt have noted, however,
that the flaws are not in themselves proof of conspiracy. They can be explained equally well by
164

more mundane causes: incompetence, laziness, the
distraction of more pressing cases, or the biases of
particular individuals.
Conspiracy to Stage the Incident
The third type of conspiracy theory combines elements of the first two types. Like the first type of
theory, it proposes that the accident was staged;
like the second, it accuses Kennedy of conspiring
to cover up the true extent of his guilt. Specifically,
the third type of theory suggests that Kennedy and
several close friends engineered the “accident” in
order to cover up other misdeeds.
Kenneth Kappel, in his 1989 book Chappaquiddick Revealed, begins with the premise that Kennedy
must have been drunk by the time he and Kopechne
got into the car. He suggests that an alcohol-impaired
Kennedy ran the car off the road (not the bridge),
causing it to roll over, leaving Kennedy hurt and
Kopechne unconscious. Kennedy and several
friends, believing that Kopechne was already dead,
righted the car and pushed it off the bridge into the
pond in order to hide the evidence long enough for
Kennedy to sober up. Kopechne regained consciousness after the car hit the pond and, unable to escape,
drowned. Kappel’s theory thus has Kennedy and his
coconspirators unintentionally committing manslaughter in the process of trying to hide the much
less (legally) serious crime of drunken driving.
A second variation of this theory takes it significantly further, positing that Kennedy murdered
Kopechne and then drove (or pushed) the car off the
bridge to conceal the fact. Many commentators on
the accident assume that (despite his denials)
Kennedy had or sought sex with Kopechne. Adherents of the murder-cover-up theory frequently
expand that assumption into the speculation that the
couple had a prior sexual encounter that left
Kopechne pregnant. Pregnancy would, the adherents
argue, provide Kennedy with a motive for the alleged
murder and cover-up. Zad Rust’s 1971 book Teddy
Bare strongly implies—but, presumably to avoid a
libel suit, does not explicitly claim—both pregnancy
and murder, covered up by a staged accident.
Neither Kappell, nor Rust, nor any of the less
prominent advocates of such theories can ade-

Chicago 7

quately account for how Kennedy and a few friends
could push the car into the water. The bridge’s
4-inch-high rails—though no barrier to a vehicle
driven at 20 miles per hour—would be a substantial obstacle to a 2-ton vehicle being pushed uphill
by three or four men struggling to find purchase on
a dirt-and-gravel road in casual shoes. Nor can such
theories account for the dark tire marks that law
enforcement officers observed on the bridge deck
the morning after the accident. The marks suggest
a car skidding with locked brakes—an image fully
compatible with an accident, but virtually impossible to stage on the spur of the moment. Allegations
that Kopechne was strangled to death are equally
difficult to reconcile with the failure of the local
medical examiner to find any marks on her throat
when he examined her body the morning after the
accident. Allegations that she was pregnant by
Kennedy are equally dubious, and equally inconsistent with established facts.
A. Bowdoin Van Riper
See also: Kennedy, John F., Assassination of;
Kennedy, Robert F., Assassination of; Nixon,
Richard.
References
Damore, Leo. 1989. Senatorial Privilege. New York:
Dell.
Hersh, Burton. 1972. The Education of Edward
Kennedy. New York: William Morrow.
Kappel, Kenneth. 1991. Chappaquiddick Revealed.
New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Lange, James E. T., and Katherine DeWitt, Jr. 1992.
Chappaquiddick: The Real Story. New York: St.
Martin’s Press.
Lerner, Max. 1980. Ted and the Kennedy Legend.
New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Olsen, Jack. 1970. The Bridge at Chappaquiddick.
New York: Ace.
Rust, Zad. 1971. Teddy Bare. Belmont, MA:
Western Islands Press.

Chicago 7
Originally beginning as the Chicago 8, this group of
political dissidents was charged with conspiracy, in
particular for allegedly crossing state lines with
“the intent to incite, organize, promote, encourage,

participate in, and carry on a riot and to commit
acts of violence in furtherance of a riot . . .” during
the 1968 Democratic National Convention (DNC)
in Chicago, Illinois. Charged under a then new
federal antiriot law, the so-called H. Rap Brown
Act, the eight defendants went on trial 24 September 1969 in what became one of the most celebrated court cases of the Vietnam era.
The composition of the group suggested the federal government was attempting to put the entire
“Movement” on trial, as those charged were a virtual
who’s who of U.S. radicalism: Yippie leaders Abbie
Hoffman and Jerry Rubin; Tom Hayden of the Students for a Democratic Society (SDS); the cochairs
of the National Mobilization to End the War—Rennie Davis and David Dellinger (who was also the
pacifist editor of Liberation magazine); Black Panther Party Chairman Bobby Seale; and academic
activists John Froines and Lee Weiner. Seale, who
had played a relatively small role in the events during the DNC and was only cited for one violation in
the indictment (a single speech made in Chicago’s
Lincoln Park), eventually saw his case severed from
the other defendants—but not before being physically restrained in the courtroom, at the order of
Judge Julius Hoffman. While Seale’s participation in
the proceedings was brief, the image of the Black
Panther leader, bound, gagged, and shackled in leg
irons became one of the most enduring symbols of
the trial.
Aside from the spectacle of Seale’s bondage, the
trial proceedings were a raucous affair, with the
defendants trading insults with the judge and
the prosecutors, creating outlandish disturbances,
and attempting to concentrate on the political issues
important to the Movement, namely the Vietnam
War, racism, and government repression, instead of
pertinent legal matters. Yippies Abbie Hoffman and
Jerry Rubin provided the majority of the trial’s fireworks with Abbie refusing to be known by “Hoffman” (claiming the judge had disgraced the name),
blowing kisses to the jurors, using outrageous props,
often laughing out loud, making disruptive
speeches, dancing around the courtroom, and, along
with Jerry Rubin, even dressing in judicial robes in
mockery of the court.
165

Chicago 7

The Chicago 7 and their two original trial attorneys pose in the lobby of the Dirksen Federal Building in Chicago during
a break in their trial, 31 October 1973. Left to right: John Froines, attorney William Kuntsler, David Dellinger, Lee
Weiner, Tom Hayden, attorney Leonard Weinglass, Jerry Rubin, Rennie Davis, and Abbie Hoffman, holding his twoyear-old-son, America. (Bettmann/Corbis)

During the five-month legal battle, the defendants succeeded in forcing the court to hear testimony from poet Allen Ginsberg, folksingers Arlo
Guthrie, Phil Ochs, “Country Joe” McDonald, Pete
Seeger, and Judy Collins, author Norman Mailer,
comedian Dick Gregory, and LSD-guru Timothy
Leary among others. Chicago mayor William Daley
also took the stand to testify and even evinced a
smile when Abbie Hoffman suggested the two of
them could settle everything by stepping outside
the courtroom. Courtroom surprises were not
always a result of the defendants’ actions, however,
as the prosecution succeeded in shocking Jerry
Rubin by introducing his DNC bodyguard as an
undercover informant and prosecution witness.
Yippie and editor of the underground newspaper
166

the Realist, Paul Krassner, a defense witness, succeeded in angering members of the Chicago 7, the
prosecution, and the court by testifying while on an
LSD trip.
At the conclusion of the trial, in February 1970,
the jury found all of the defendants not guilty of
charges of conspiracy, but with the exception of
John Froines and Lee Weiner they were found
guilty of intent to riot. Judge Hoffman also ruled
that the defendants and their attorneys, William
Kunstler and Leonard Weinglass, were guilty of a
total of 175 counts of contempt. Kunstler and
Weinglass were sentenced to four- and two-year
prison terms respectively, while their clients each
received five-year sentences and $5,000 fines. In
1972, the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals over-

Christian Identity

turned the criminal convictions of the Chicago 7
and all but thirteen of the contempt charges were
eventually dismissed. The appellate court based its
decisions on Judge Hoffman’s openly antagonistic
attitude toward the defense and his refusal to allow
for sufficient inquiry into jury biases. Further, the
court determined that Judge Hoffman and the
prosecutors had knowledge of the FBI’s electronic
surveillance of the Chicago 7’s defense attorneys,
which it suggested would most likely have allowed
for reversal of the convictions upon appeal.
Nicholas Turse
See also: Yippies.
References
Bloom, Alexander, and Wini Breines. 1995. “Takin’
It to the Streets”: A Sixties Reader. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Dellinger, David T. 1970. Contempt: Transcript of
the Contempt Citations, Sentences, and Responses
of the Chicago Conspiracy 10. Chicago, IL:
Swallow Press.
Epstein, Jason. 1970. The Great Conspiracy Trial:
An Essay on Law, Liberty, and the Constitution.
New York: Random House.
Hoffman, Abbie. 1980. Soon to Be a Major Motion
Picture. New York: Perigree Books.
Peck, Abe. [1985] 1991. Uncovering the Sixties: The
Life and Times of the Underground Press. New
York: Citadel Press.
Rubin, Jerry. 1970. Do It! Scenarios of the
Revolution. New York: Simon and Schuster.
University of Missouri-Kansas City Law School.
“The Chicago Seven Trial.” http://www.law.umkc.
edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/Chicago7/chicago7.
html.
Walker, Daniel. 1968. Rights in Conflict: Convention
Week in Chicago, August 25–29, 1968. New York:
Bantam Books.

Christian Identity
Christian Identity is a loosely organized religious
movement associated with a number of small fundamentalist churches and extreme right-wing political and religious groups in the United States. By
the last three decades of the twentieth century,
Identity had become the religion of choice for a
number of conspiracy-minded survivalists, millennialists, and neo-Nazi groups, like Aryan Nations,

The Order—responsible for a wave of crime in the
American West in the 1980s, including the murder
of Denver radio host Alan Berg in 1984—and some
factions of the Ku Klux Klan. Because it is not an
organized denomination, there is some variation in
Identity doctrine among its many churches and
groups, but most share its core beliefs: that AngloSaxons are the true descendants of the ten lost
tribes of Israel and hence God’s chosen people; that
Jews are the literal offspring of a sexual liaison
between Satan and Eve in the Garden of Eden; and
that, as a result, Anglo-Saxons are locked in battle
over the redemption of humankind against a global
Jewish conspiracy intent on the eradication of white
Christians and complete worldwide domination.
Christian Identity has its roots in BritishIsraelism, a benign religious movement founded in
Victorian England by John Wilson. In his Lectures
on Our Israelitish Origin (1840), Wilson sought to
prove empirically that the lost tribes of Israel
migrated from the East over the Caucasus mountains and eventually settled in northern Europe. In
Wilson’s view, however, Jews were not the enemy.
Rather, they were fellow Israelites, though members of a different tribe. British-Israelism made its
way to North America in the late nineteenth century and first gained broad appeal in the United
States in the 1920s and 1930s. The spread of
British-Israelism in the United States was due
largely to the efforts of Howard Rand, a former
construction worker turned British-Israelism
organizer, and William J. Cameron, editor of
Henry Ford’s Dearborn Independent, which published some of the period’s most explicit antisemitic
writings, including “The International Jew,” the
first widespread U.S. popularization of Protocols of
the Elders of Zion. Thus in the United States,
British-Israelism came increasingly to be linked
with extreme right-wing politics: nativism, racism,
and, especially, antisemitism. From this strand of
the British-Israelist movement in the United
States, Christian Identity emerged.
Drawing on scriptural authority and especially
biblical prophecy, Identity followers view all of
human history as a conspiracy by Jews to subvert
Christianity and establish Satan’s kingdom on earth.
167

Christian Science

In the writings of post–World War II Identity leaders such as Gerald L. K. Smith and Wesley Swift,
the international Jewish conspiracy to control the
world begins at creation. Jews are not only distinct
from Saxons, they are the direct descendants of
Cain, the son of Eve’s seduction by Satan. Saxons,
on the other hand, are descended from Adam’s son
Abel and are the true Israelites. The Jews are
merely impostors performing the work of Satan to
eliminate the true Israelites just as Cain, the progenitor of modern Jews, killed Abel. Identity followers believe World Jewry is behind the persecution of Jesus, the ritual killing of Christians at the
Roman Colosseum, the invasion of Western Europe
by Ghengis Khan to destroy Christian civilization,
and Napoleon’s attempt to conquer the world. As
foretold in the Book of Revelation, the final stage of
the Jewish plot begins in the twentieth century with
the Jewish-backed Communist revolution in Russia,
Jewish control over the international banking system and especially the Federal Reserve Corporation, and the establishment of such international
organizations as the United Nations and the Council on Foreign Relations. Much of Identity doctrine,
such as the schism in the Nation of Israel in the
tenth century B.C. that separated the southern
tribes from the ten northern tribes, follows scholarly orthodoxy. However, scholars reject Identity’s
“two-seeds” theory of Genesis as well as a number
of other spurious practices upon which Identity
doctrine relies: numerology, pyramidology, and a
form of philology based upon similarities in the
sounds of words. Because the movement lacks a
central organization, the number of Identity Christians is difficult to determine, but it continues to be
the religious orientation of choice for white
supremacist groups in the United States.
Jeffrey Insko
See also: Antisemitism; Aryan Nations; Ford,
Henry; One-World Government; Protocols of the
Elders of Zion; Smith, Gerald L. K.
References
Barkun, Michael. 1994. Religion and the Racist Right.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Coates, James. 1987. Armed and Dangerous: The Rise
of the Survivalist Right. New York: Hill and Wang.

168

Website
Church of True Israel: http://churchoftrueisrael.
com/swift.

Christian Science
A prominent but secretive religious sect founded in
the nineteenth century, Christian Science has often
been at the center of conspiratorial speculation. In
the period after the Civil War the United States was
a breeding ground for new religious movements. Of
these, Christian Science (formally known as The
Church of Christ, Scientist) was one of the most
successful. Since the 1960s the church has become
influential in the United States and beyond through
the publication of its newspaper, the Christian Science Monitor, and through some of its members
being in positions of power (e.g., Nixon aides H. R.
Haldeman and John Ehrlichman). After the failed
attempt to establish a cable television channel in
the 1980s, the church was beset by financial difficulties and scandals in the 1990s, including reports
that it had borrowed from its own pension fund.
Known for the belief that only the mind and spirit
exist in reality, and that pain, disease, and even death
are illusions, Christian Scientists practice religious
healing in place of medical intervention, a policy
that recently has been the subject of much controversy after the deaths of several children whose parents allegedly followed these tenets.
The sect was founded in the late nineteenth century by Mary Baker Eddy (1821–1910) after she
experienced a spontaneous healing. Eddy had suffered from frequent mental and physical disorders
throughout her first four decades. After undergoing treatment by Phineas Parkhurst Quimby, a
mesmerist and faith healer, Eddy began to find
relief from her ailments. After Quimby’s death, in
1866, Eddy emerged as a teacher and healer.
Eddy’s early attempts to gather a following were
fraught with disappointment, but despite setbacks,
the determined Eddy pushed on. In 1875 she published Science and Health and followed it with The
Key to the Scriptures in 1883. These provided the
base for the new religion. From 1881 to 1889, new
practitioners were trained at the Massachusetts

Christian Science

Metaphysical College. These disciples then
returned home to heal the sick and spread the new
religion. In 1892, she established The Mother
Church to coordinate and centralize authority in
her far-flung sect. The result of Eddy’s reorganization coupled with a trained and loyal cadre of followers fanning out across the nation led to an
exponential growth of Christian Science in the late
nineteenth century.
As the cult prospered, suspicions about it began
to multiply. Clergy and laymen began to attack the
sect in general and Eddy in particular. Mark Twain
was among the more famous critics of the new
denomination. The seemingly sudden explosion of
Christian Science led Twain to worry that by sheer
force of numbers it would control the U.S. Congress by the 1930s. Churchmen saw not only a danger of losing members (many lost congregants in
mass exoduses) but the undermining of modern
civilization by such a mystical and pantheistic religion. Detractors believed that the Christian Science denial of the existence of sin and the body
would destroy the moral fabric of society by undercutting all morality. Many suspected that Eddy’s
use of the Bible was just a cover to hide the diabolic nature of her teachings.
Adding to the critics’ concerns was the sect’s penchant for secrecy. No one outside the ruling elite
even knew how many members belonged to the
denomination. The church’s bylaws prohibited the
release of membership numbers outside the organization. Financial matters were a closely guarded
secret. Even today, official records of the church are
largely off limits to nonmember researchers.
Many suspicions about Christian Science centered on the habits of its controversial founder.
During her lifetime Eddy refused to relinquish any
power over the governance of the sect. All high
officials were responsible to her alone. Only her
writings (which many felt had been either plagiarized from Quimby or ghostwritten by her disciples), along with select passages from the Bible,
were to be used in worship. Eddy’s authoritarianism and her statements led critics to charge that
she actually saw herself as equal with (if not above)
Jesus and, in effect, a deity. Even if this was not her

Mary Baker Eddy founded the religion of Christian
Science and established the Church of Christ, Scientist,
one of the United States’ fastest-growing religious
institutions of the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. (Library of Congress)

intention, opponents felt that Eddy’s deification
would eventually be the result of her teachings.
For a potential deity and a believer in the nonexistence of anything except the mind, Eddy appeared
very materialistic to her critics. She was obsessive
about copyrighting virtually every communiqué she
wrote and amassed a fortune of over two million dollars—though during her lifetime it was suspected of
being much higher. Eddy and her church were
accused of being charlatans and hucksters—bilking
the ignorant and weak out of their money for a cure
that could not be had without the Christian Science–trained healer.
169

Church of the SubGenius

A final concern of the opponents of Christian Science was that its mystic cures were a danger to the
health of its “patients.” For obvious reasons, medical professionals were most concerned with these
alleged healing practices. Individual doctors and
the American Medical Association attacked the sect
as a danger, especially to infants as well as to the
community at large, as the inadvertent spreader of
communicative diseases through its hostility to vaccinations.
Opponents of Christian Science need not have
worried. Although the sect has survived to the
present day, it has not posed the danger to society
that critics predicted. Its estimated worldwide
membership is 150,000 scattered among 2,600
branch churches. Most nonmembers’ only knowledge of the sect is in the form of the newspaper it
publishes, the Christian Science Monitor, and the
“Reading Rooms” placed in conspicuous locations
by the branch churches—reminders of a more
vibrant and “dangerous” Christian Science.
Enoch Baker
References
Cunningham, Raymond J. 1967. “The Impact of
Christian Science on the American Churches,
1880–1910.” American Historical Review 72:
885–905.
Peel, Robert. 1966–1977. Mary Baker Eddy. 3 vols.
New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Twain, Mark. 1993 [1907]. Christian Science.
Buffalo, NY: Prometheus.

Church of the SubGenius
The Church of the SubGenius is either an
extremely sinister cult, or (much more likely) an
extremely elaborate practical joke feeding on the
subculture of conspiracy theory. The Church
claims to reveal the truth according to J. R. “Bob”
Dobbs: an alien, known as JHVH-1, had been masquerading as G-D but now wanted it revealed that
there was a conspiracy created by normal people to
deplete the “slack” (the opportunity to effortlessly
achieve your goals) of the so-called “abnormal”
people, known as SubGeniuses. To this end a
church was developed, one that gleefully takes
170

money and teaches through poster and flyer art,
“devival” meetings, and recorded rants (first broadcast on community radio stations and through tape
trading, now available on-line). The primary icon of
the SubGenius movement is the trademarked illustration of “Bob’s” head, that of a middle-aged, smiling white man smoking a pipe, who looks as though
he was cut out of a 1950s advertisement.
The SubGenius concept was created by Doug
Smith (now known as the Reverend Ivan Stang)
and Philo Drummond in the early 1980s, and word
was spread through flyers and pamphlets. Thirty
dollars would buy salvation, redemption, and the
opportunity to put “Reverend” before your name.
This fee has subsequently been paid by close to
10,000 people over the years.
In effect the Church has created a satiric commentary on religious observance and domination,
conspiracy theory, and conventional morality. The
“Rapture” of orthodox Christian faith is replaced by
the “Rupture,” revivals are replaced by “devivals,”
and so on. SubGenii gather to rant about the world
and everything in it, as they waited for the coming of
the Aliens on X-Day, 4 July 1998.
In the late 1990s it appeared as though the
Church would have to meet a crisis as X-Day
approached. 4 July 1998 was to be the day that the
aliens returned, and SubGenius “clenches” the
world over would gather and hold parties every
year in anticipation. The parties still continue,
although they are known as X-Day plus the number of years following 1998, e.g., 2002 is known as
XXXXX-Day. Many excuses have been offered by
loyal SubGenii as to why the aliens did not arrive,
including the suggestion that they had done so, but
that the visit was either not noticed, or erased from
our minds by superior technology. But, according
to the Church, it is quite likely their absence was
the point, because then excuses could be made.
The SubGenii exist as an excuse to have a good
time and thumb their nose at organized religion
and orderly behavior, as well as themselves. Every
SubGenius clench is required to have a member
who does not believe, and the core belief of the
movement is to believe nothing and everything,
preferably at the same time; or, to paraphrase the

Civil Rights Movement

Church itself, the SubGenius are either a joke masquerading as a religion, or a religion masquerading
as a joke. Whichever they truly are would not make
much of a difference.
Solomon Davidoff
See also: Scientology.
References
Fade to Black Comedy Magazine. “Question and
Answer with the Reverend Ivan Stang.” http://
www.fadetoblack.com/interviews/ivanstang.
The SubGenius Foundation. 1987. The Book of the
SubGenius, ed. Reverend Ivan Stang. New York:
Simon and Schuster.
———. 1994. Revelation X: The “Bob: Apocryphon,
ed. Reverend Ivan Stang. New York: Simon and
Schuster.

Civil Rights Movement
Comprising some of the most momentous and
tumultuous episodes and events in the history of
the United States since abolition, the civil rights
movement, not surprisingly, is associated with
numerous conspiracy theories that issued (and continue to issue) from a diverse cross-section of political, ideological, and social viewpoints. The most
significant conspiracy theories regarding this area
of interest concern the alleged Communist ties of
the civil rights movement; the systemic disenfranchisement of African Americans; covert and illegal
operations of the government to countervail the
efforts of civil rights groups; and ambiguities surrounding the assassinations of key civil rights leaders Martin Luther King, Jr., and Malcolm X.
The civil rights movement in the United States
must first and foremost be understood in terms of
the civil, political, and juridical struggles to achieve
racial equality and full citizenship rights for African
Americans. Known also as the “Black Freedom
Movement,” the “Negro Revolution,” and the “Second Reconstruction,” the civil rights movement
was, at the outset, a challenge to the legally and
socially sanctioned system of racial segregation.
This was called the Jim Crow system and was introduced at the level of state law by secessionist South-

ern Democrats (“Dixiecrats”) as a means of retarding and reversing the advances made by African
Americans during the Reconstruction era after the
Civil War. The Supreme Court later sanctioned the
legitimacy of Jim Crow practices in the infamous
Plessy v. Ferguson case (1896), which upheld segregation in railroad cars. Beyond its policies and practices of racial segregation, the Jim Crow system also
engendered and sought to maintain the political
and social disenfranchisement of African Americans
through the systematic denial of voting rights,
access to adequate education, and ownership of real
estate. In response, individuals and organizations
comprising the civil rights movement staged and
otherwise participated in protest marches, boycotts,
and physical violations of segregation laws. Notwithstanding the continuing debate about both the
actual date of its inception, and whether or not its
objectives have indeed been fully realized, the civil
rights movement is commonly recorded to have
been inaugurated by the Montgomery bus boycott
in 1955 and concluded with the Voting Rights Act
of 1965.
The Civil Rights Movement and Perceived
Threats of Secularism and Communism
The increasing frequency of confrontations triggered by various constituents of the civil rights
movement was accompanied by a growing body of
opinion that a Communist conspiracy was behind
not only domestic attempts at advancing the social
and political status of African Americans, but also
the mounting demands for decolonization worldwide. As early as 1958, the then director of the FBI
J. Edgar Hoover had stated that “[t]he Negro situation is being exploited fully and continuously by
Communists on a national scale” (Davis, 319).
While not purely speculative, since many Communist writers openly praised and voiced support for
civil rights endeavors and identities, this statement
was indicative of a greater store of anxieties entertained by many political and religious factions of
the conservative Right.
Influenced by and drawing from the rhetoric of
white and Christian supremacy, as well as the enduring collective anticommunism suspicions generated
171

Civil Rights Movement

Civil rights activists occupying a lunchroom counter during a sit-in. (Library of Congress)

by McCarthyism and the context of the cold war,
fundamentalist Christian groups such as the Christian Crusade led by Billy James Hargis were convinced that African Americans had not been averse
toward segregation until they were suborned by nonChristian (or, “godless”) radicals. In the widely distributed Communist America, Must It Be? (1960)
Hargis charged the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), the
United Nations, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO),
and the Supreme Court as being composed of
“Communist-front supporters” or otherwise linked
to pro-communist subversive plots to undermine
and dispossess “patriotic Christian-American people.” Other prominent voices of the Christian Crusade included figures such as David Nobel, who
talked of conspiratorial plots hatched by civil rights
groups to replace the (Christian) “American way of
172

life” with “primitive” and sexually licentious secularism. Similar, though less hyperbolical, views were
circulated by political figures such as Medford Evans
from the Conservative Society of America. In the
influential article “Civil Rights Myths and Communist Realities” (1963), for example, Evans asserted
that not only was Martin Luther King, Jr., an instrument of communism, but that the comparatively
conservative NAACP was effectively an organization
operated by Communist forces.
In a bid to dispel public fears, a statement was
issued by then Attorney General Robert Kennedy
on 25 July 1963, which expressly denied the existence of any evidence implicating any of the heads
of the primary civil rights groups to be Communists or “Communist-controlled.” Nevertheless, for
many individuals and collectives, the pervasive
belief in the existence of surreptitious collusions
between organizations of the civil rights movement

Civil Rights Movement

and both domestic and international forces of communism could not be gainsaid. For certain sectors
of the population, it could be argued that denials
such as Kennedy’s actually served to fuel the imaginations and apprehensions about the conspiratorial possibilities underlying any organized efforts to
promote diversity and racial equality. For example,
the very popular underground novel The Turner
Diaries (1980), written by white supremacist
William Pierce under the pseudonym Andrew
Macdonald, futuristically portrays a heroic white
supremacist insurrection against an “oppressive”
racially diverse government called “The System.”
Conspiracies against Civil Rights
Groups and Individuals
At the other end of the spectrum, in focusing upon
the systemic nature of the disenfranchisement of
African Americans and other cultural minority
groups, radical perspectives including those of the
predominantly European-American New Left and
certain factions of the civil rights movement increasingly perceived the entrenched and institutionalized
racial hegemony in the United States as a form of
internal colonialism. This domestic mode of colonialism was depicted by proponents such as Malcolm X
from the Nation of Islam (and later the Organization
of Afro-American Unity), Stokely Carmichael, and
Charles V. Hamilton as a totalitarian, neo-imperialistic structure that subjugated black (and other minority) Americans and that was closely linked to U.S.
economic and military exploitation and domination
of developing countries. While this portrayal cannot
be understood strictly in terms of conspiracy theory
discourse, it nevertheless served as an ideological and
theoretical framework upon which claims about the
conspiratorial nature of white privilege in the United
States could be based. For example, the widely read
pulp fiction novellas of the 1960s and 1970s by
underground African American writer Iceberg Slim
drew greatly upon the ideological paradigms of Black
Power while representing the federal government
and the ruling white classes, both conservative and
liberal, as white supremacists conspiring to maintain
the economic, political, and social subjugation of
black Americans.

While more broadly defined accounts of covert
white supremacist plots enjoyed some popularity
during the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s and beyond,
public fascination in the United States and worldwide continues to be transfixed by conspiracy theories surrounding particular events, organizations,
and political figures associated with the civil rights
movement. Perhaps the most durable of these theories concern the assassinations of two of the most
prominent black leaders in the political history of
the United States: Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and
Malcolm X (née Malcolm Little; also known later by
his adopted religious name, El-Hajj Malik ElShabazz). Regardless of whether the civil rights
movement is officially defunct or not, conspiracy
theories appending the deaths of King and Malcolm
X continue to circulate. In both cases, almost all of
those theories implicate in the assassinations, to
varying degrees, the federal government. This is not
surprising since both King and Malcolm X (and by
and large, all known organizations associated with
the civil rights movement) were closely monitored
by government agencies throughout most of their
respective careers. Moreover, FBI director J. Edgar
Hoover made no secret of his glaring contempt and
anxiety toward the agendas and aspirations of civil
rights groups and individuals. Hoover not only
believed that the civil rights movement threatened
the societal stability of the United States, but
because of their perceived potential as “black messiahs,” Hoover harbored great apprehensions toward
influential African American figures such as King,
Malcolm X, and the Nation of Islam’s leader Elijah
Muhammed. Until it was exposed in early 1971, the
FBI-launched Counterintelligence Program (COINTELPRO) functioned beyond legal restrictions to, in
Hoover’s own words, “expose, disrupt, misdirect,
discredit and otherwise neutralize” groups and individuals associated with the civil rights movement.
The covert, systemic, and illegal operations of COINTELPRO directed against opponents to the government’s domestic and foreign policies were revealed
in the 1970s by Senate and House committee
inquiries to involve not only the FBI, but also the
CIA, the United States Army Intelligence, the
White House, the office of the attorney general, and
173

Clan of the Mystic Confederacy

even local and state law enforcement. Known targets of COINTELPRO included the American Indian
Movement, the Communist Party, the Socialist
Worker’s Party, black nationalist groups, and many
members of the New Left (comprising the Students
for a Democratic Society, and a broad range of antiwar, antiracist, feminist, lesbian and gay, and environmentalist groups).
Matthew Cleveland
See also: Anticommunism; Black Panthers;
COINTELPRO; Farrakhan, Louis; Federal Bureau of
Investigation; Hoover, Edgar J.; King, Martin
Luther, Jr., Assassination of; Malcolm X,
Assassination of; Nation of Islam.
References
Davis, David B., ed. 1971. The Fear of Conspiracy:
Images of Un-American Subversion from the
Revolution to the Present. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Knight, Peter. 2000. Conspiracy Culture: From the
Kennedy Assassination to The X-Files. London
and New York: Routledge.
Levy, Peter B. 1998. The Civil Rights Movement.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Melley, Timothy. 2000. Empire of Conspiracy: The
Culture of Paranoia in Postwar America. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.
Turner, Patricia A. 1993. I Heard It through the
Grapevine: Rumor in African-American Culture.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

Clan of the Mystic Confederacy
Predating the multitude of the monetary and political conspiracies fomented later in the nineteenth
century by such organizations as the Knights of the
White Camellia and the Ku Klux Klan was the Clan
of the Mystic Confederacy, created and organized in
1832. The Confederacy, as it became known in 1834,
was composed of outlaws, gangsters, and gamblers,
located in Arkansas and known as confederates. The
men were from thirteen states, all south of the
Mason-Dixon line and “transienters who traveled
from place to place” (Walton, 55). This gang was governed by a Grand Council that was made up of “100
senior outlaws and an army of 1500 ‘striker’ and
‘undercover agents’ who worked among the slaves”
(Messick and Goldblatt, 24). The group was headed
174

by John Murrell (a.k.a. “Murrel” and “Murel”), a
convicted slave trader and horse thief, originally
from Tennessee. The clan’s goal was to gain political
power in cities along the Mississippi and Ohio Rivers
and, of course, to obtain wealth in the process.
The Confederacy conspired to achieve these
ends by stealing slaves, holding them, and labeling
them as runaways; and then selling them and keeping the money for the spread and operation of the
clan. If a confederate could find out about a particular disappearance for which a reward was offered,
the confederate would inform the owner that he
had found the slave, claim the reward, but then
sell the slave to someone else. Eventually, following an informer’s testimony to the police in 1835,
Murrell himself was arrested.
While he was jailed, Murrell decided to promulgate still another conspiracy to incite a revolt that
would take place on Christmas Day 1835. (The
date would later be changed to 4 July 1836.) This
revolt would involve slaves and 2,000 of Murrell’s
men. The revolutionaries planned first to kill the
slave masters and then to continue the attack in
neighboring towns, recruiting other slaves to the
revolt along the way.The aim was for the Confederacy to take over the governments of such cities as
Natchez, Mississippi. One of the incentives for the
slaves was each man would be able to “pick out a
white woman for himself” (McGowan, 2). The conspiracy was discovered, however, and some of those
responsible confessed and told of their roles not
only in the conspiracy, but in the Mystic Confederacy itself. Some of those accused of participating in
the conspiracy were hanged, owing to circumstantial evidence or guilt by association. As the planned
revolt collapsed, cities and towns aware of the conspiracy informed the participants, especially gamblers, that they had twenty-four hours to leave the
area, or else suffer the consequences. With Murrell
in prison, he did not have enough power to continue either his conspiracies or the Mystic Confederacy, and upon his release from prison, the Confederacy disbanded.
Karen Holleran
See also: Fugitive Slave Act; Ku Klux Klan.

Clinton, Bill and Hillary

References
McElwee, William E. 1905. “About John A.
Murrel.” Rockwood Times, 14 and 21 September.
McGowan, Sam. n.d. “Murrel, the Outlaw.” http://
www.members.aol.com/McGowan /murrel.html.
Messick, Hank, and Burt Goldblatt. 1976. The Only
Game in Town: An Illustrated History of
Gambling. New York: Thomas Y. Cromwell Co.
Mississippi Local History Network. 2000. “John A.
Murel.” http://www.MLHN 2000.org/usa/ms/
state/outlaws/murrel.html.
Walton, Augustus Q. 1994. A History of the
Detections, Conviction, Life and Designs of John
A. Murel, The Great Western Land Pirate.
Woodville, TX: Dogwood Press.

Clinton, Bill and Hillary
William Jefferson Clinton, forty-second president
of the United States (1993–2001), and his wife
Hillary Rodham Clinton were accused by conspiracy theorists, most of them conservative Republicans, of a multitude of misdeeds including drugdealing, covering up a murderous attack in Waco,
lying about their role in the Whitewater scandal,
and of killing numerous troublesome witnesses.
Conspiracy theorists’ eagerness to investigate
the Clintons had several origins. In his acceptance
speech to the 1992 Democratic National Convention, Clinton professed his admiration for Carroll
Quigley, author of Tragedy and Hope: A History of
the World in Our Time (1966) and famous in conspiracy circles for claiming that the world was run
by a secret circle of well-connected financiers. This
was seen as a proof that Clinton himself was part of
the world-governing cabal. The Monica Lewinsky
scandal, during which Internet dirt-diggers such as
Matt Drudge proved to be right while Clinton lied,
gave added credence to other conspiracy theories.
Bill Clinton’s alleged deviousness and lack of honesty, his support for abortion rights and gays in the
military, and his wife’s image as a power-hungry lesbian harpy created a multitude of Clinton-haters
eager to uncover, or to fabricate, stories proving
their involvement in sinister plots. The Internet,
which became widely used during Clinton’s two
terms in office, provided a perfect medium for the
propagation of such conspiracy theories.

One conspiracy theory dates back to Clinton’s
years as governor of Arkansas (1978–1980 and
1982–1992), when drug dealer Barry Seal smuggled drugs into a small airfield in Mena, Arkansas.
Authors such as Joel Bainerman, in The Crimes of
a President (1992), later claimed that the Mena
operation was part of a larger federal plot to train
and fund Nicaraguan contras. When Clinton
refused to launch a state grand jury investigation of
the alleged Mena conspiracy, he was accused of
being a part of the plot as well. Larry Nichols, a former employee of the state of Arkansas whom Clinton had fired, claimed in numerous interviews to
media sources that he had evidence that Clinton
used the Mena airport for drug smuggling, and that
Clinton intended to kill Nichols for that reason.
On 19 April 1993, FBI troops attacked the embattled Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Texas.
Federal authorities blamed the building’s occupants
for starting the fire that killed sect leader David
Koresh and eighty of his followers during the
assault, but various documentaries, such as the
Oscar-nominated Waco: The Rules of Engagement
(1997), argued that the FBI used canisters of flammable gases, then ignited them inadvertently and
that Clinton and Attorney General Janet Reno subsequently conspired to cover up this fatal blunder. A
variant of the theory also concludes that three of the
four agents from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
and Firearms who died in a firefight at the compound on 28 February 1993 were former Clinton
bodyguards that he sent to Waco to be killed.
Other theories blame Clinton for scores of murders besides the victims of the Waco standoff.
Dave Emory, in his syndicated radio program One
Step Beyond, calculated that the mortality rate in
the Clinton administration was such that it could
not be explained by a simple statistical coincidence.
Internet sites kept a running list of the “Clinton
Body Count,” which included Commerce Secretary Ron Brown, whose plane crashed in Croatia on
3 April 1996 (missing X-ray shots of his head
allegedly prove that he was shot to cover up secret
technological transfers to China).
The Pittsburgh Tribune-Review, at the urging of
its owner, conservative multimillionaire Richard
175

Clinton, Bill and Hillary

U.S. President Bill Clinton and First Lady Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton attend a Senate swearing-in reception 3 January
2001 at the Mayflower Hotel in Washington, D.C. Hillary Clinton was sworn in to the U.S. Senate on Capitol Hill earlier
in the day. (AFP/Corbis)

Scaife, published numerous stories by Christopher
Rudy claiming that White House Counsel Vince
Foster, who officially killed himself on 20 July 1993
in Fort Marcy Park, Virginia, was in fact murdered.
Foster was a former partner in Hillary Clinton’s
Rose Law Firm and his personal files disappeared
from his office shortly after his suicide, so Clinton
enemies accused the presidential couple of killing
Foster to cover up their involvement in the Whitewater property-dealing scandal. Another theory,
publicized by Sherman K. Skolnick in his Conspiracy Nation Internet newsletter, claims that Foster
was spying for Israel’s Mossad and that he killed
himself after Hillary Clinton confronted him with
evidence of his treason.
Christian Coalition member Pat Robertson, in his
700 Club televised talk show, and reporter Ambrose
Evans-Pritchard, in the Sunday Telegraph, helped
176

propagate Foster conspiracy theories by giving an
aura of respectability to them. A 1994 Time-CNN
poll showed that only 35 percent of Americans
believed that Foster killed himself, proving that the
murder theory’s audience was wider than the circle
of conservative Republicans, libertarians, and religious fundamentalists spreading other Clinton conspiracy theories.
In May 1994, Rev. Jerry Falwell’s cable television
show, Old Time Gospel Hour, repeatedly broadcast
excerpts from filmmaker Pat Matrisciana’s Clinton
Chronicles, in which she accused Clinton of murdering, among others, Arkansas investigator Jerry Parks
to prevent him from publicizing evidence of Clinton’s sexual affairs. A reported 300,000 copies of the
film were sold on Falwell’s shows and other venues.
Federal investigators have so far failed to prove
any connection between Clinton and the various

Clinton Body Count

murders listed on the “body count,” including Foster’s. Concerned by the many conspiracy theories
involving her and her husband, Hillary Clinton
claimed on 27 January 1998 that there was a “vast
right-wing conspiracy” to undermine their credibility. This conspiracy, hatched by the Republic
National Committee, included the “Arkansas Project,” in which Scaife spent millions of dollars to dig
up scandals dating from Clinton’s years in
Arkansas, and on legal help provided to Paula
Jones in her sexual harassment lawsuit aimed at
Clinton.
Philippe R. Girard
See also: Clinton Body Count; Foster, Vince;
Scaife, Richard Mellon; Waco; Whitewater.
References
Bainerman, Joel. 1992. The Crimes of a President:
New Revelations on Conspiracy and Cover-Up in
the Bush and Reagan Administrations. New York:
SPI Books.
The Clinton Chronicles. 1994. Dir. Pat Matrisciana.
Citizens’ Video Press.
Conason, Joe, and Gene Lyons. 2000. The Hunting
of the President: The Ten-Year Campaign to
Destroy Bill and Hillary Clinton. New York: St.
Martin’s Press.
Kuntz, Phil. 1995. “Heir Turned Publisher Uses
Financial Largess to Fuel Conservatism.” The
Wall Street Journal. 12 October, A1.
Quigley, Carroll. 1966. Tragedy and Hope: A History
of the World in Our Time. London: MacMillan.
Thomas, Kenn. 1994. “Clinton Era Conspiracies!
Was Gennifer Flowers on the Grassy Knoll?
Probably Not, but Here Are Some Other Bizarre
Theories for a New Political Age.” The
Washington Post. 16 January, C3.
Waco: The Rules of Engagement. 1997. Dir. William
Gazecki. Somford Entertainment.

Clinton Body Count
The “Clinton Body Count” conspiracy theory postulates that the deaths of dozens of Americans
allegedly associated with former president William
Jefferson Clinton can only be explained as homicides. The underlying assumption of the conspiracy
theory is that the mortality rate among friends and
associates of Clinton is higher than what would be

predicted by the laws of statistical probability. Conspiracy theorists use the term “Arkanicide” (based
on Clinton’s home state) to describe the allegedly
mysterious deaths. The sinister version of the conspiracy theory posits that Clinton played a direct
role in the murder of some or all of his associates.
The more benign version argues that individuals or
groups working without the knowledge or approval
of Clinton are responsible for the deaths. Admitting an inability to link Clinton to many of the
deaths, Linda Thompson, who developed the original body count list, hypothesized that “people trying to control the president” are responsible for the
deaths.
The Clinton Body Count originated as a list of
thirty-four suicides, accidental deaths, and unsolved murders posted by Thompson in 1994 on a
website entitled “The Clinton Body Count: Coincidence or the Kiss of Death.” Thompson is a conservative activist who quit her one-year-old Indianapolis general law practice in 1993 in order to
start and run the American Justice Federation.
According to Thompson, Clinton was directly connected to twenty-eight of the thirty-four individuals on her list. Thompson described as “collateral
deaths” an additional four people on the list who
allegedly died because of their relationship with an
associate of Clinton’s, and also included on the list
two individuals (James Bunch and John Wilson)
with a possible connection to Clinton.
Former Republican representative William
Dannemeyer brought the conspiracy theory to the
attention of the U.S. political elite by mailing a letter to the congressional leadership, with copies
going to all the members of both chambers of Congress in 1994. In the letter Dannemeyer identified
twenty-four individuals associated with Clinton
who had died under “other than natural circumstances.” Most of the names listed by Dannemeyer
in the letter could be found on the website maintained by Thompson. Arguing that the number of
suspicious deaths “has reached a total that can only
be described as frightening,” Dannemeyer called
for congressional hearings into the deaths.
Pat Matrisciana, founder and president of Jeremiah Films, brought the conspiracy theory into U.S.
177

Clinton Body Count

popular culture by producing and distributing several videos that accused Clinton of complicity in the
murders. Bill and Hillary’s Circle of Power and The
Clinton Chronicles are two videos produced and distributed by Matrisciana that propagate the conspiracy theory. Jerry Falwell, who founded the Moral
Majority and is a leader of the Religious Right,
helped Matrisciana promote and distribute two of
the videos. Falwell promoted Circle of Power on his
cable television show for four consecutive weeks and
helped Matrisciana sell more than 60,000 copies of
The Clinton Chronicles. To date, Matrisciana has
sold an estimated 300,000 copies of The Clinton
Chronicles.
Talk radio has also played a role in promoting the
conspiracy theory. Stan Solomon claims that Thompson first announced the list on his conservative talkradio show. Gary Park, whose murdered father was
the head of Clinton’s gubernatorial security team,
has spoken on approximately 2,000 conservative
talk-radio shows. Larry Nichols, who was one of the
narrators on The Clinton Chronicles, has also been a
very popular guest on the talk-radio circuit.
According to Thompson, there are three possible
types of victims: an insider, a New World Order, or
a bodyguard. An “insider” is a person with a close
personal relationship to Clinton or his inner circle
of business associates. A “New World Order” is
someone who had planned, observed, or opposed
Clinton’s plans to use U.S. military personnel in
domestic or United Nations military operations. A
“bodyguard” is an individual responsible for protecting or escorting Clinton during or after his first
presidential campaign.
Deputy White House Counsel Vince Foster and
Secretary of Commerce Ron Brown are the two
most prominent individuals included in every variation of the list. On 20 July 1993, U.S. Park Police
discovered the body of Vince Foster in Fort Marcy
Park with a single gunshot wound. Secretary
Brown, along with thirty-four other passengers and
crew members, died when the air force jet transporting them from Tuzla, Bosnia, to Dubrovnik,
Croatia, crashed into a mountainside on 3 April
1996. Despite the fact that Independent Counsels
Robert Fiske and Kenneth Starr ruled that Foster
178

had killed himself, some conspiracy researchers
continue to speculate that someone may have murdered Vince Foster. Even though the air force
released a twenty-one-volume crash report that
blamed flawed procedures and crew errors for the
crash, conspiracy theorists still believe that Clinton
ordered the murder of Brown in order to assure his
silence about possible illegal acts.
Opponents of the Clinton Body Count conspiracy theory offer several criticisms. First, many of
the individuals on the list have little or no apparent
connection to Clinton. For example, James Bunch,
who appeared on the original list, supposedly had a
“little black book” with names of influential Texans
who had hired Texas prostitutes. Thompson fails to
explain the connection between Bunch and Clinton, who has never lived in Texas. Proponents of the
conspiracy theory also fail to offer a sufficiently
believable motive for Clinton to authorize the murders of many of the individuals on the list. For
example, four members of Marine Helicopter
Squadron One, who are responsible for transporting the president, died on 19 May 1993 when their
helicopter crashed during a routine maintenanceevaluation flight. Marine spokesperson Chief Warrant Officer Robert Jenks blamed the incorrect
installation of a spindle pin for the crash. Thompson
placed the four men who died in the crash on the
Clinton Body Count list even while admitting that
she did not know Clinton’s motive for the supposed
murder. Thompson speculated that the men “could
have been privy to information about Clinton’s plan
for Bosnia” without offering any details. The Clinton Body Count conspiracy theory also ignores one
of the realities of national politics, which is that
public figures, such as the president of the United
States, are going to have a larger circle of friends
and acquaintances than the average citizen.
Chris McHorney
See also: Clinton, Bill and Hillary; Foster, Vince.
References
Austin, John. 2000. Arkansides: The Legacy and
Body Count of Bill Clinton. Bloomington, IN: 1st
Books Library.
Conason, Joe, and Gene Lyons. 2000. The Hunting
of the President. New York: St. Martin’s Press.

Cocaine

Cocaine
On 18–20 August 1996, the San José Mercury News
published a three-part series of articles titled “Dark
Alliance,” in which allegations were made about a
conspiracy among the federal government, Central
American political operatives, and California drug
dealers that resulted in the introduction and spread
of crack cocaine among the black community. The
series seemed to confirm the long-standing suspicions of many African Americans that the federal
government had played a role in the creation of the
drug problems faced in the inner cities.
Crack cocaine had first come to the public’s
attention in the mid-1980s. This new form of the
drug was less expensive than powder cocaine,
allowing it to become a drug of choice for poor
urban drug users for the first time. Although use of
crack cocaine remained limited largely to the inner
city, its appearance kindled fears of a widespread
drug epidemic across the nation. The resulting
“crack scare” associated the drug with a wide array
of existing and potential social problems. Both the
Reagan and Bush administrations made drugs, and
crack cocaine in particular, a high-priority target
for federal law enforcement.
Historical Context of the
Crack Cocaine Conspiracy Theory
The crack scare and its association with existing
social, political, and economic problems was not
unprecedented in U.S. history. The triangulation of
existing social worries, the use of a drug perceived
as dangerous, and the association of this drug with
certain marginalized social or ethnic groups had
appeared several times before. This phenomenon
can be traced at least as far back as the temperance
and prohibition movements of the nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, when racial, social, and
political strife was often blamed by both corporate
and middle-class America on alcohol and its use by
recent immigrants who made up the working class.
On a smaller scale, the same constellation of anxiety, drugs, and “undesirables” was involved in the
opium scares of the late nineteenth century, when
a recession hit following the completion of the
transcontinental railroad. Immigrant Chinese who

had come to the country to work on the railroad
became a source of anxiety for the white middle
class when their service was done. The practice of
opium smoking, which some of the Chinese had
brought with them, was suspected as an important
factor in alleged criminal activity by Chinese immigrants, and this led to the first laws criminalizing
opium in the United States. The first laws against
cocaine and marijuana were also results of this
dynamic when their use was associated with a variety of groups seen as undesirable, including Mexicans, African Americans, criminals, prostitutes, and
transients. Despite the fact that the social ills that
concerned lawmakers had little or nothing to do
directly with these drugs or the groups with whom
they were associated, the linking of specific drugs
with marginalized groups raised the fear that
middle-class youth would fall victim (directly or
indirectly) to the ravages of these drugs and those
that used them.
In the case of crack cocaine, the social fears surrounding the drug resulted in new laws and sentencing guidelines that targeted dealers and users
of the drug. Possession of crack generally led to
longer jail sentences than a comparable amount of
powder cocaine. There was a significant rise in drug
arrests, a disproportionate number of which were of
African American men. In addition to the effects of
crack itself on inner-city communities, governmental policies were perceived by many blacks as assisting in the destruction of the inner cities under the
guise of protecting them. It was in this context that
rumors about possible government connections to
the appearance of crack cocaine first appeared.
Such rumors, however, remained largely contained
to segments of the African American community.
Not until the appearance of the “Dark Alliance”
series did these rumors gain a national audience.
In the series, author Gary Webb suggested that
during the early to mid-1980s, the CIA allowed and
encouraged Contra rebel forces from Nicaragua to
distribute a new form of cocaine, crack, in the Los
Angeles area in order to finance the ongoing struggle against the Communist government of that
country. A series of charges, allegations, and denials
erupted in the weeks and months that followed the
179

Cocaine

Demonstration against the CIA. (Koester Axel/Corbis Sygma)

publication of the articles. Town meetings were
organized, political and social leaders of the black
community held forth on television talk shows, talkradio pundits took up the topic with abandon, and
congressional hearings were held. While the “Dark
Alliance” series brought about a reexamination of
the drug problem and the plight of those living in
U.S. inner cities, this public interest diminished
over time, particularly after the editor of the San
José Mercury News published a column that called
into question the validity of some of the charges
made in the original series.
At first glance, it is perhaps mystifying that the
series would have caused the furor it did. The scope
of the series was fairly narrow. Webb focused on the
story of a notorious Los Angeles drug dealer named
“Freeway Ricky” Ross and two Nicaraguan
refugees, Oscar Danilo Blandon and Juan Norwin
Meneses. Webb stated that the two Nicaraguans
(both of whom were vehemently anti-Sandinista)
180

not only participated in the drug trade, but, through
Ross, became the primary source of crack cocaine
in Los Angeles, and ultimately many other urban
centers in the United States. Moreover, Webb
implied that Menses and Blandon used profits from
crack sales to fund the covert war against the Sandinistas during the 1980s and did so with the knowledge and approval, if not the outright assistance, of
the CIA.
Despite the inflammatory nature of its allegations, the “Dark Alliance” series did little to prove
that the “conspiracy” went beyond the specific
individuals mentioned in the articles. Nowhere in
the series did Webb specifically state that the CIA
was actively involved in drug dealing or offer concrete proof that the CIA even knew about such
activity when it was occurring. Rather, Webb
focused strictly on the drug dealings of Blandon
and Meneses and implied that the CIA must have
known about their activities given that they worked

Cocaine

for (as Webb put it) a “CIA-run army” in Central
America. Even if such allegations were true, it
would in no way show that drug running was a primary mode of funding the Contras, let alone that
the CIA was actually involved in funneling drugs to
the inner city.
Despite the inferential leaps necessary to conclude that, based on the evidence presented in the
“Dark Alliance” series, the CIA was directly
responsible for the introduction of crack to urban
America, the reaction from sections of the African
American community was immediate and loud.
Within weeks of the series’ publication, the implied
allegations were taken up by the black media, and
calls were made by African American politicians
and other public figures for official inquiries into
the actions of the CIA.
The strength of this response is even more difficult to explain given the fact that the “Dark Alliance”
series was not the first time allegations linking the
CIA and drug trafficking had been made and investigated in a national forum. Charges that the government had colluded with drug runners had been
made for many years. Various groups alleged that
the United States government had participated in
the heroin trade during the Vietnam War as part of
the “Golden Triangle” of drug trade in Southeast
Asia. These charges came not only from the political
Left, but also from members of the radical Right
such as James “Bo” Gritz, a hero to many in the militia movement in the United States.
Specific charges involving cocaine smuggling
and Central America had also been made previously, and they had been examined in some depth.
Allegations about the connections between the
Contras and drugs were made by Associated Press
reporters Robert Parry and Brian Barger in 1985.
Several newspapers, including the San Francisco
Examiner, also explored the possibility of such a
connection in the years that followed. Congress
itself examined the issue in a Senate subcommitee
in 1989. The subcommitee’s report stated that the
United States had at times ignored drug trafficking
activity by those it considered foreign policy allies.
Yet, these charges did not create the same level
of controversy as the “Dark Alliance” series.

Through the late 1980s and into the 1990s, the
contention that drugs, and crack cocaine in particular, had been brought into the country with the
complicity of the federal government was limited
largely to urban legends circulating among the
African American community.
Reception and Impact of the
“Dark Alliance” Series
One contributing factor for the impact of the “Dark
Alliance” series was the specifics of the charges.
While the narrowness of the series’ focus might have
made it more difficult to suggest that it was proof of
a government-wide conspiracy, the details of the
charges and the evidence behind them made them
more plausible. The series named names, locations,
and times that could serve as a framework on which
to hang already-existing charges of conspiracy. Now,
rather than simply “the government,” specific people
could be accused. Demands for inquiries could be
more focused. Investigations could be more specific.
That this particular incarnation of the link
between the government and drugs came from a
mainstream and respected newspaper also lent credence to the charges. The charges could no longer
be written off as simply the paranoid conspiracy theories of people who had not truly examined the
available facts. Even if one doubted the conclusions
of the series, it could not be denied that Webb had
amassed a large number of facts that, if interpreted
in certain ways, suggested government knowledge
or participation in drug running. That Webb was
white also added to the sense that the series was
independent confirmation of long-held relatively
private suspicions among African Americans.
A third factor was the availability of alternative
media, particularly the Internet. In the weeks and
months that followed, Websites, e-mail lists, online
magazines, and talk-radio shows aimed at African
American audiences repeated and elaborated on
the “Dark Alliance” series. Without relying on standard media outlets, the allegations could be disseminated across the nation. Use of the Internet by
African Americans rose markedly in the wake of
the “Dark Alliance” series. Within weeks, there
were 2,500 separate Websites with links to the
181

Cocaine

online version of the series. These links, as well as
other evidence or accusations, could be put
together by anyone with access to a computer, and
the end result was a website that could look every
bit as professional and authoritative as that of a
large newspaper, a scholarly journal, or even a government agency. This gave a new sense of authority to the ethos of the conspiracy narratives.
Finally, the fact that the charges were made in
such a public and specific way made those outside
the African American community aware of the
them. A much larger audience that had been
unaware of the allegations of government drug running became engaged in the dialogue about the conspiracy narrative. The “Dark Alliance” series not
only brought what had been urban legend to
national attention, but it broadened the discussion
of other issues such as the plight of the inner cities,
the war on drugs, the disparate sentencing of crack
and powder cocaine dealers, and the warehousing of
young black males in the nation’s prisons. If these
issues were not resolved, they were at least discussed—and these discussions were unlikely to have
taken place without the force of specific allegations.
Eventually, the spread of the story became a
story in itself, ensuring that the series’ content was
reported in media outlets ranging from the New
York Times to The National Review.
The wide publication of the “Dark Alliance”
series, along with the public discussion of its implications, led to government action of various forms.
Several members of Congress, including Maxine
Waters, Kweisi Mfume, Mel Watt, Jesse Jackson, Jr.,
Elijah Cummings, and John Conyers, called for government investigations into the charges. The result
was the Congressional Black Caucus Legislative
Conference titled “Cocaine, Contras, and the CIA:
How They Introduced Crack into the Inner City,”
which drew an audience of 2,000. Within weeks of
the publication of the “Dark Alliance” series, investigations were begun into the possible connection
between the CIA and the crack cocaine trade by the
Justice Department, Congress, and the CIA itself.
In the case of the various congressional hearings into
the matter, members of the African American community were able to participate not simply through
182

their elected representatives, but personally. A hearing sponsored by Representative Juanita McDonald
on 20 October 1996, in Los Angeles, drew an audience of more than 500 residents from Compton and
South Central Los Angeles, who interrupted the
proceedings several times with cheers and boos,
heckling witnesses from law enforcement agencies
who testified that they had no evidence of CIA
involvement with drug dealing, and cheering when
Ricky Ross spoke to the hearing via telephone from
prison and accused the CIA of “the destruction of
my community.”
A similar scene was played out in Washington,
D.C., four days later at a hearing before the Senate
Select Committee on Intelligence chaired by Senator Arlen Specter, which was called to look into
the allegations of CIA involvement in the crack
trade. Drawn in part by calls from local black radio
station WOL-AM to take advantage of an opportunity to make their voices heard, 300 local residents
filled the hearing room. When Fredrick Hitz, the
CIA’s top internal investigator, responded in a way
that displeased the crowd, they jeered him so
vocally that Senator Specter threatened to clear the
room if the outbursts continued.
The most dramatic gathering, however, included
the appearance of CIA director John Deutch at a
town hall in South Central Los Angeles on 17
November 1996. The often rowdy meeting represented the high-water mark for the CIA/crack conspiracy narrative’s political life on the national
stage. Hosted by Representative McDonald, the
event was also attended by Representatives Julian
Dixon and Jane Harman, a former colleague of
Deutch’s when they served together in the Carter
administration. The town hall meeting was broadcast on television by C-SPAN and drew ABC News’
Nightline television show, which broadcast from
the site of the town hall after the meeting.
Attended by over 800 Los Angeles residents, the
town hall allowed individuals from the inner city
literally to point an accusatory finger at a figure
who represented, if not embodied, the power they
felt was responsible for the introduction of crack
and its related problems to their community. This
tone was set early on by Representative McDonald

Cocaine

herself in her opening remarks, in which she said,
“It is not up to us to prove that the CIA was
involved in drug trafficking in South Central Los
Angeles . . . rather, it is up to them to prove they
were not.”
When Deutch was introduced, it was clear that
the crowd was skeptical. Boos mixed with applause
as Deutch began his remarks. Deutch addressed
the audience, assuring them that the CIA had done
much in the fight against drugs, that there was no
evidence of a conspiracy, but that there would be a
thorough investigation. The hostility continued
after he was finished and took questions from the
audience. Several questioners drew comparisons
between the spread of crack and the Tuskegee
experiments or the slave trade. Others accused
Deutch, as a representative of the government, of
destroying inner-city communities and killing children through the introduction of crack cocaine.
Others, while not specifically accusing the government of destroying the inner cities, implied the
federal government’s culpability by insisting that
action be taken by the government to rebuild the
inner cities and create jobs.
Some audience members chastised Representative McDonald for bringing Deutch into the community in the first place, claiming the event would
lead to no concrete action and would signal the end
of media interest in the story (a prediction that to
some extent proved prophetic). In its most rowdy
moments, the town hall degenerated into profanitylaced diatribes and at least one open call for revolution as the only possible solution to oppression by
the government. The town hall meeting ended as it
had begun, with a mixture of boos and applause for
Deutch.
If the town hall didn’t provide a productive forum
for ideas, it did accomplish one goal that in some
ways was just as important: it represented an
acknowledgment by the CIA (and the government
in general) of the grievances of the inner-city community. Even in sending Deutch to Los Angeles to
deny the accusations, the CIA tacitly admitted the
validity of the collective voice of protest from that
community (although not the validity of the charges
made with that voice). The town hall represented

the power of the coalesced narrative of conspiracy to
win attention from those beyond the community in
the media, the government, and the public at large.
The Los Angeles town hall was, in many ways,
the zenith of the post–“Dark Alliance” media blitz.
The CIA’s internal investigation of the charges was
extended well beyond the original sixty days. With
any official resolution of the charges postponed
indefinitely, a few politicians such as Maxine
Waters, and some advocacy groups, such as “Crack
the CIA,” continued to speak about the charges
and call for the government to release all documents and findings concerning a possible connection between the CIA and crack dealing. Despite
these efforts, however, the story began to recede
from the headlines.
What news attention was paid to the story
increasingly dwelt on the journalistic ethics of the
San José Mercury News in publishing a series that
strongly implied a CIA connection to crack cocaine
without actually providing hard evidence to support the claim. This reached a crescendo in May
1997, nine months after the “Dark Alliance” series
was published, when Jerry Ceppos, the editor of
the paper, published a column in which he apologized for running the series in its original form.
While clearly stating that he felt the story was valuable and that many of the basic assertions in the
story were supported by the facts, Ceppos said the
series went too far with a number of its implications, particularly those that suggested a direct link
between the crack trade and the CIA and that the
crack problem’s origins could be traced to the trio
of Blandon, Menenses, and Ross.
This was a blow to the political efficacy of the
CIA/crack narrative, a fact recognized by those
who believed in the truth of that narrative. Numerous Internet postings on web pages devoted to the
conspiracy allegations bemoaned the “cowardice”
of Ceppos for backing away from the story. While
pointing out that Ceppos never suggested the bulk
of the story was untrue or even unsubstantiated,
many anti-CIA activists rightly noted that the
mainstream press was portraying Ceppos’s statement as tantamount to a retraction and that the
public would most likely see the allegations as the
183

Coercive Acts

stuff of “conspiracy nuts.” Indeed, media attention
continued to dwindle. When the CIA finally
released the report of its internal investigation in
January 1998, it found no evidence of a link
between CIA activities in Central America and the
import or creation of crack cocaine. With that, the
story largely disappeared from the national scene,
apart from the occasional speech in Congress by
Representative Waters claiming that the investigation was not adequate and that more needed to be
done.
Ted Remington
See also: African Americans; AIDS; Farrakhan,
Louis; Muhammad, Elijah; Nation of Islam.
References
Bush, George. 1996. Address to the Nation. 5
September.
Department of Justice/Office of the Inspector
General. 1997. The CIA-Crack Cocaine
Controversy: A Review of the Justice
Department’s Investigations and Prosecutions.
http://www.usdoj.gov/oig/special/97–12/exec.htm.
Reinarman, Craig, and Harry G. Levine, eds. 1997.
Crack in America. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Webb, Gary. 1999. Dark Alliance: The CIA, the
Contras, and the Crack Cocaine Explosion. New
York: Seven Stories Press.
Websites
Congresswoman Maxine Waters: http://www.house.
gov/waters.
Final Call: http://www.finalcall.com.
Nation of Islam: http://www.noi.org.

Coercive Acts
In response to the Boston Tea Party, the British
Parliament in March 1774 passed a series of punitive laws known as the Coercive Acts, which many
colonists interpreted as a deliberate conspiracy
against their rights. As a part of the protests against
British taxation, Bostonians had in December 1773
destroyed a large shipment of tea, in open defiance
of Governor Thomas Hutchinson and all British
authority. Since this protest was only the latest in
an escalating series that would eventually lead to
the American Revolution, the administration of
Oliver, Lord North planned to make an example of
184

unruly Massachusetts in the hope of getting the
American colonies back in line. While these measures were officially known as the Coercive Acts,
colonists critical of British policies since 1763 typically dubbed them the Intolerable Acts.
The Coercive Acts consisted of four laws. The
Boston Port Act shut down Boston Harbor until
restitution was made for the destroyed tea and King
George III decided it was safe to reopen the harbor.
In the Massachusetts Government Act, Parliament
decreed that the colonial council should be
appointed by the king. The law also forbade the traditional town meetings from debating anything other
than local matters. The Justice Act allowed for the
trial of British officials and their subordinates in
another colony or Great Britain, if the governor
decided a fair trial was not possible in Massachusetts.
Finally, the Quartering Act allowed the governor to
requisition unoccupied public buildings for the housing of troops. A fifth law, the Quebec Act, was unconnected to the Coercive Acts but critical colonists perceived it as part of the Intolerable Acts as well. This
measure organized the colony of Quebec, only
recently acquired from France as the result of the
Seven Years’ War (1756–1763). The Quebec Act
allowed the Catholic Church to retain many aspects
of being the established church in the predominantly
Catholic colony. It also upheld French civil law,
which differed considerably from English common
law; for example, it did not include trial by jury.
For American patriots, the Coercive Acts in conjunction with the Quebec Act amounted to no less
than an outright conspiracy to eradicate traditional
liberties in America. In their interpretation, the
laws enabled the British government to choke the
colonies economically by closing down the ports,
dissolve representative government and regional
traditions of political autonomy, and quarter soldiers in private homes and have them kill political
dissidents at will. Trial would take place in England
where the soldiers would be acquitted. Finally, this
conspiracy theory continued, Quebec would serve
as an example for a tyrannical government of colonial America, eliminating traditional boundaries,
destroying religious liberty, and imposing alien laws
that did away with sacred rights like trial by jury.

COINTELPRO

Many of these charges were quite unfounded.
The Quebec Act was quite unrelated to the events
in Massachusetts, and the Quartering Act did not
actually allow for the quartering of soldiers in private homes. This erroneous interpretation nevertheless found its way into twentieth-century U.S.
schoolbooks. On the other hand, the Coercive Acts
certainly did aim at curbing the political autonomy
of Massachusetts, and they reduced participatory
elements of the political system and imposed harsh
economic sanctions. The idea was to single out
Massachusetts and by extension discipline the
other colonies. However, while the North administration’s intention for the Coercive Acts was limited
and specific, many colonists’ interpretations were
vast and alarmed.
Instead of intimidating the other colonies, the
Coercive Acts prompted them to declare their solidarity with Massachusetts. The First Continental
Congress convened as a response to the crisis and
decided upon general nonimportation of English
goods. In its Declaration of Colonial Rights and
Grievances, the Congress echoed a conspiratorial
interpretation of British policy by denouncing it as
“a system formed to enslave America.” The ill will
generated by the Coercive Acts controversy contributed substantially to the outbreak of the American Revolution.
Markus Hünemörder
See also: American Revolution; Boston Tea Party;
Quebec Act.
References
Ammermann, David. 1974. In the Common Cause:
American Response to the Coercive Acts of 1774.
Charlottesville, VA: University Press of Virginia.
Bailyn, Bernard. 1967. The Ideological Origins of
the American Revolution. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

COINTELPRO
COINTELPRO, FBI-speak for Counterintelligence
Program, was the bureaucratic designation for the
FBI’s clandestine and illegal program of political
repression directed against dissenters from the 1950s
to the 1970s. The most dangerous manifestation of J.

Edgar Hoover’s countersubversive and antidemocratic ideology during his fifty-year reign as director of
the FBI, COINTELPRO was designed “to divide, conquer, weaken” and otherwise disrupt a wide variety
of social movements through the use of intimidation,
surveillance, and “dirty tricks.” Thousands of individual COINTELPROs were carried out under several general headings: Espionage; Communist Party
(CPUSA); Socialist Workers Party (SWP); Disruption of White Hate Groups; New Left; and Black
Extremists. However, in its common usage, the term
“COINTELPRO” has come to signify the entire context
of secret counterrevolutionary action directed
against the social-democratic and civil rights movements of the 1960s and 1970s. When activists and
congressional investigators exposed the actions of
COINTELPRO in the 1970s, it publicly revealed just
how closely the FBI resembled a totalitarian political
police and sparked the most significant backlash
against the Bureau in its history.
Development of Repressive Techniques
The formation of COINTELPRO represents a consolidation and expansion of the federal government’s
repressive apparatus, most of which had been in
place since the FBI’s founding in the early 1920s.
The innovation of COINTELPRO in the 1950s over its
predecessor COMINFIL (Communist Infiltration
Program) was the FBI’s turn to active disruption
rather than mere infiltration and harassment of dissident groups. To this end, the Bureau developed a
standard repertoire of techniques.
COINTELPRO made careful use of “a cooperative
news media” to “leak” disinformation about political
groups. Agents engaged in basic acts of sabotage such
as canceling meetings, disrupting speaking engagements, and interfering with party fund-raising.
COINTELPRO compiled and shared blacklist information with employers and landlords. COINTELPRO
made harassment arrests designed not to convict
activists for criminal violations, but to isolate leaders
like black activist Angela Davis and force their supporters to refocus the movement’s financial and political resources into legal defenses. When prosecutions
occurred, COINTELPRO fabricated evidence, extorted
testimony, and covered up possibly exculpatory
185

COINTELPRO

evidence. Such judicial abuses of the FBI’s investigative capacity were rampant during the trial of the
Chicago 7 in the late 1960s.
Inducing “paranoia” in targeted political groups
was a stated goal of COINTELPRO, as revealed in one
FBI document that unequivocally states its desire
to “enhance the paranoia endemic in [New Left]
circles, and will further serve to get the point across
that there is an FBI agent behind every mailbox”
(Churchill and Vander Wall, 1990b). To this end,
COINTELPRO employed both simple forms of surveillance such as warrantless wiretaps and electronic bugging, as well as more invasive forms such
as break-ins, known as “black-bag jobs,” human
tails, and mail opening. COINTELPRO ran an enormous domestic spy-ring composed of thousands of
informants, infiltrators, and agents provocateurs.
Paid by the Bureau to join political groups, these
infiltrators either provided inside information or
provoked members into committing radical acts
that could be used to generate bad publicity or to
justify police crackdowns. COINTELPRO sent bogus
letters and fake flyers, known as “black propaganda,” designed to create personal splits, exacerbate political factionalism, or pit competing groups
against one another. A particularly insidious form
of black propaganda was known as “snitch-jacketing,” in which the Bureau worked to cast suspicion
on targeted individuals for being a spy or Bureau
informant with the intention of isolating or provoking reprisals against the target by his or her former
comrades. These forms of black propaganda
proved especially effective at weakening both the
Communist Party (CPUSA) and the Black Panther
Party (BPP). At its most extreme, COINTELPRO has
been—rarely but nonetheless directly—involved in
assassinations, including the murders of Chicago
BPP leader Fred Hampton and American Indian
Movement (AIM) member Anna Mae Aquash.
In the end, the secrecy surrounding COINTELPRO
may speak the loudest: all of these techniques are
either illegal or were widely abused and represent
the structured and systematic violation of the civil
liberties of citizens engaging in constitutionally
protected activities.

186

A History of Abuses
According to FBI documents made public in the
mid-1970s, the first directives to carry the COINTELPRO heading were issued in 1956 and targeted what
was left of the CPUSA. In the total of 1,388 COINTELPRO actions implemented against the CPUSA
between 1956 and 1971, nearly all of the tactics outlined above were developed and “field-tested,” pitting the vast resources of Hoover’s political police
against an already moribund Communist group.
Despite its weakness as an organization, the
CPUSA was targeted by the most colorful and
potentially murderous COINTELPRO of all time
under the name “Operation Hoodwink.” The operation was approved in October 1966 and maintained for several years, during which the FBI sent
forged letters and leaflets with the aim of provoking
a fight between the CPUSA and the Cosa Nostra
over labor issues in the Brooklyn dockyards. The
obvious intention of Operation Hoodwink was to
encourage mob leaders to “neutralize” key CPUSA
members, but while there is no evidence that any
Communists were “rubbed out” as a result, it is not
for lack of trying by the FBI.
The first extension of COINTELPRO beyond the
surviving “Old Left” came in the early 1960s, when
the FBI began actions against the Puerto Rican
Independence Movement and the southern-based
civil rights movement, especially its leader Martin
Luther King, Jr. In the words of a published COINTELPRO document, “the Bureau wishes to disrupt
the activities of these organizations and is not
interested in mere harassment” (Churchill and
Vander Wall, 1990b).
Hoover’s commitment to white supremacy has
been well documented, and he took a direct interest in the FBI’s campaign to disrupt the civil rights
movement, which he regarded as nothing less than
a Communist conspiracy. Hoover held a personal
vendetta against King, whom he repeatedly referred to as a “burrhead” possessed by “obsessive
degenerate sexual urges.” When King publicly
accused Hoover of refusing to protect civil rights
activists from violence, Hoover attacked King as
“the most notorious liar in the country.” Hoover

COINTELPRO

placed King under full-time surveillance, infiltrated the Southern Christian Leadership Council
(SCLC), unleashed a public smear campaign, and
even went so far as to try to blackmail King into
committing suicide. Such evidence substantiates
King’s claim that “they are out to get me, to harass
me, break my spirit” (Garrow). Today, King’s family continues to cite Hoover’s campaign against the
civil rights leader as circumstantial evidence of
Bureau involvement in King’s assassination.
The project code-named “COINTELPRO–White
Hate Groups,” involving the infiltration of the
southern Ku Klux Klan during the 1950s and
1960s, further reveals the racist and reactionary
goals of the Bureau during the upheavals of those
decades. Despite the fact that the Bureau claimed
to have over 2,000 informants in the Klan, roughly
equal to 20 percent of the total KKK membership
across the South in 1965—including a significant
portion of Klan leadership—the FBI was unwilling
and supposedly unable to prevent Klan violence
against civil rights activists. Instead of investigating
the murders of at least thirty-five civil rights workers, the Bureau actively harassed and investigated
the victims, who they believed, in the words of one
Klan leader and FBI informant, represented a
“nigger-commie invasion.” Eventually, the Bureau
did make some progress in disrupting the Klan, but
only after the civil rights movement had achieved
significant legislative victories in 1964 and 1965.
As the southern civil rights movement gave birth
to a wide range of social-democratic, civil rights,
and national liberation struggles—including Black
Power organizations like the BPP, indigenous
groups like the AIM, the student New Left, and
the feminist movement—COINTELPRO grew more
aggressive under the combined forces of Hoover
and Nixon.
The FBI document that inaugurated the project
headed “COINTELPRO: Black Nationalist–Hate
Groups” clearly expresses its intentions: “The purpose of this new counterintelligence endeavor is to
disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize
the activities of black nationalist, hate-type organizations and groupings, their leaders, spokesmen,

Memo from C. D. Brennan to W. C. Sullivan, 9 May
1968. (Federal Bureau of Investigation)

membership, and supporters” (Churchill and Vander Wall, 1990b). The FBI’s covert war on the BPP
began with the extensive infiltration of the Panthers
by informers and provocateurs. COINTELPRO had
great success with “snitch-jacket” campaigns against
Stokey Carmichael, Eldridge Cleaver (who fled the
country), and Geronimo Pratt (who was successfully framed for a murder that the FBI’s own surveillance later exonerated him of after he spent over
twenty-five years in prison). Forged cartoons and
flyers sent by the FBI to spark fights between the
BPP and another group known as United Slaves
resulted in the deaths by shooting of Panthers Jon
Huggins and Bunchy Carter in 1969. Most violently
of all, the FBI engineered the assassination of Fred
Hampton and BPP Field Marshal George Jackson

187

COINTELPRO

in San Quentin prison in 1971. Following Hoover’s
explicit directive to “prevent the rise of another
black ‘messiah,’” the nineteen-year-old Hampton
was targeted because of his amazing success at
transforming Chicago street gang members into
community activists. Based entirely on evidence
provided by an FBI informant, the Chicago police
raided Hampton’s house early on the morning of 4
December 1969, killing both Hampton and fellow
Panther Marc Clark as they slept in their beds,
injuring several others, and arresting all the survivors for assaulting the police. Though these murders were officially declared “justifiable” at the
time, a 1983 judgment determined that there had
been an active government “conspiracy to deny
Hampton, Clark, and the BPP plaintiffs their civil
rights” (Churchill and Vander Wall, 1990b).
The highest concentration of COINTELPRO actions
were directed against members of the American
Indian Movement (AIM) in the early 1970s. The
AIM sought to restore pride in traditional Indian
culture, to confront white America with its denied
history of genocide against indigenous people, and
to fight for their collective rights as sovereign
nations. The FBI’s campaign began after the AIM
seriously embarrassed the Nixon administration in
the highly publicized takeovers of Alcatraz Island in
1969 and the Bureau of Indian Affairs in 1972.
After the AIM shifted its organizational focus back
to the reservation, leading to the second siege of
Wounded Knee in 1973, the FBI began a bloody
struggle to disrupt and destroy the group. In the
end, dozens of AIM activists were killed and imprisoned, and Leonard Peltier was successfully convicted for the murder of two FBI agents based on
forged evidence, extorted testimony, an illegal
extradition from Canada, and judicial intimidation.
Beginning shortly after the student takeover of
Columbia University in 1968, the “COINTELPRO–
New Left” project targeted the full range of student and anti-Vietnam protest groups, including
Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), Vietnam
Veterans Against the War, the Weathermen, and
several feminist groups, both radical and mainstream. Movement leaders, including all members
of the Chicago 7, were explicitly targeted by COIN188

TELPRO as well as pediatrician Benjamin Spock,
Pentagon Papers whistleblower Daniel Ellsberg,
feminist leader Betty Friedan, and even Beatles
member John Lennon. Special efforts were made
to prevent cross-racial coalitions, especially an
alliance between SDS, the Weathermen, and the
BPP. Provocateurs played a key role in disrupting
the New Left. The most famous New Left provocateur was known as “Tommy the Traveler”
(Thomas Tongyai), who was paid by the FBI to
move from college to college in upstate New York
posing as a radical member of SDS and encouraging students to kill cops and blow up buildings.
When a group of students actually took his advice
and destroyed the ROTC office at Hobart College,
Tommy’s cover was blown. Hundreds of similar
cases have been documented on campuses across
the country in the 1960s. In the end, COINTELPRO
proved quite effective at distorting the message
and public image of New Left groups, hastening
their fragmentation, accentuating their suspiciousness, and facilitating their decline.
However, the New Left finally gave COINTELPRO
is comeuppance. The existence of COINTELPRO
remained an official secret until 8 March 1971,
when a group of activists calling itself the Citizens
Commission to Investigate the FBI broke into the
FBI’s office in Media, Pennsylvania, and “liberated”
a large number of files. When the group published
several of these documents with the COINTELPRO
heading, Hoover immediately discontinued the
program to prevent “embarrassment to the
Bureau.” After Hoover’s death, the Church Committee began a major investigation of the FBI.
Aided by the passage of the Freedom of Information Act, the American people have now gained a
fuller picture of the FBI’s history and its role as a
political police. Indeed, the extent of COINTELPRO
activity is still being exposed, as evidenced by the
recent revelation of FBI infiltration of the women’s
movement. As one columnist for the Washington
Post explained in the mid-1970s after the revelations of COINTELPRO and similar lawlessness by the
CIA, “American society has gone buggy on conspiracy theories of late because so many nasty demonstrations of the real thing have turned up” (Don-

Cold War

ner). Despite the significant exposures, the major
media and congressional investigators chose to
blame FBI “abuses” on the “excesses” of the
recently deceased Hoover, and, in the end, no substantial reforms or checks were instituted.
Although the FBI officially terminated COINTELPRO in the 1970s, scholars and activists have argued
that the FBI continues its practice of spying on and
disrupting social-democratic and civil rights organizations, including antinuclear and Third-World
solidarity groups in the 1980s, radical environmentalist organizations in the 1990s, and the current
global justice movement.
Michael Cohen
See also: American Indian Movement;
Anticommunism; Black Panthers; Chicago 7; Civil
Rights Movement; Federal Bureau of Investigation;
Hoover, J. Edgar; King, Martin Luther, Jr.,
Assassination of; Ku Klux Klan; LSD; Nation of
Islam; Nixon, Richard; Pentagon Papers; Students
for a Democratic Society; Weathermen.
References
Churchill, Ward, and Jim Vander Wall. 1990a.
Agents of Repression: The FBI’s Secret Wars
against the Black Panther Party and the American
Indian Movement. Boston, MA: South End Press.
———. 1990b. The COINTELPRO Papers: Documents
from the FBI’s Secret Wars against Dissent
in the United States. Boston, MA: South End
Press.
Davis, James Kirkpatrick. 1997. Assault on the Left:
The FBI and the Sixties Antiwar Movement.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group.
Donner, Frank J. 1981. The Age of Surveillance: The
Aims and Methods of America’s Political
Intelligence System. New York: Vintage.
Garrow, David J. 1981. The FBI and Martin Luther
King, Jr. New York: Penguin.
Matthiessen, Peter. 1991. In the Spirit of Crazy
Horse: The Story of Leonard Peltier and the FBI’s
War on the American Indian Movement. New
York: Penguin.
O’Reilly, Kenneth. 1989. Racial Matters: The FBI’s
Secret File on Black America, 1960–1972. New
York: Free Press.
Rogin, Michael. 1987. “Political Repression in the
United States.” Pp. 44–80 in Ronald Reagan, the
Movie, and other Episodes in Political
Demonization. Berkeley: University of California
Press.

Rosen, Ruth. 2000. “The Politics of Paranoia.” Pp.
227–260 in The World Split Open: How the
Modern Women’s Movement Changed America.
New York: Penguin.
Website
Paul Wolf’s COINTELPRO site: http://www.derechos.
net/paulwolf/cointelpro.

Cold War
A broad consensus agrees that the period of cold
war lasted from the end of World War II until the
disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1989, although some historians maintain that the seeds of
conflict were discernible in the Western response
to the Russian Bolshevik Revolution in 1917. The
cold war was a strategic and ideological conflict
between the Western powers led by the United
States and the Communist bloc dominated by
Soviet Russia. The conflict was driven by each
side’s deep suspicion of the other and by an extreme and often exaggerated perception of the
threat their actions posed to geopolitical stability.
An apparent reluctance to engage in open conflict
on a global scale meant that both sides sought to
advance their cause through other means, including
diplomatic noncooperation, strategic alliance, economic sanction, espionage, propaganda, and arms
proliferation. Another common strategy as the conflict escalated was the resort to “proxy” intervention,
in which the larger opposition between East and
West was played out on distant battlefields in Southeast Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East.
Broadly speaking, the conflict was premised on
entrenched differences of ideology, principle, and
perception between the Communist states and the
capitalist, democratic West. For this reason, the
huge military, diplomatic, and industrial efforts were
necessarily underscored by a vast “struggle for the
minds and wills of men” throughout the cold war.
The basic ideological antipathy between East
and West during the early or “high–cold war” era
was articulated in a wide range of texts, from high
profile addresses by successive U.S. presidents and
their political and cultural representatives, to confidential policy papers and strategic directives
(Crockatt). The cumulative effect of this huge mass
189

Cold War

of public and private utterance was the establishment in the United States of a pervasive discourse
of conspiracy and threat in which the Soviet Union
was commonly characterized as aggressive and
expansionist in its foreign policy and repressive and
totalitarian at home. While we now know beyond
doubt that much of this was indeed the case—
Stalin’s brutal regime with its endemic purges and
gulags was the very opposite of a democracy—it is
also clear that the volatile state of international
relations was intensified by U.S. anticommunist
propaganda at home and intervention abroad.
Together with parallel efforts by the Communist
Information Bureau (COMINFORM) in the Soviet
Union, U.S. propaganda and counterrevolutionary
techniques tended to rule out the possibility of
negotiation and had the effect of increasing international tension to a level of perpetual crisis.
The Origins and Conduct of U.S. Foreign
Policy during the “High Cold War”
The policies of the Truman and Eisenhower administrations during the high–cold war period—roughly
from 1945 until the election of John F. Kennedy in
1960—effectively mapped out the strategic direction of, and also legitimated, the discursive climate
in which successive presidents from Kennedy to
Reagan would operate for the next three decades. It
was, however, the British wartime prime minister,
Winston Churchill, who most succinctly delineated
the new world order and the perceived threat posed
by the Soviet Union when he declared at Fulton,
Missouri, in March 1946, that Soviet imperialism
had drawn “an iron curtain” across the continent of
Europe. In identifying not only the political and ideological, but also the spiritual dimensions of the
threat facing the West, Churchill gave voice to a
refrain that would soon resound through the corridors of power in the West.
The top echelons of U.S. foreign policy—from
Secretary of State James Byrnes; his successor
Dean Acheson; key Foreign Service officers stationed in the Soviet Union like Ambassador Averell
Harriman and his successor George Kennan; and
all the way up to President Truman himself—
began to perceive their former ally in the East as a
190

direct “challenge and peril to Christian civilization.” If one single document may be credited with
instituting the cold war worldview in U.S. political
life, as well as with the introduction of the apocalyptic vocabulary that would soon characterize all
utterances across the range of foreign and domestic policy, it was the so-called Long Telegram sent
by Kennan from his post in Moscow to Secretary
Byrnes in Washington on 22 February 1946. Many
prominent commentators in the United States and
Western Europe, including Kennan himself, had
long stressed the incompatibility of Soviet communism and Western capitalism. Now Kennan’s
telegram provided an apparently definitive explanation, identifying the czarist legacy of imperialism
in Russia and its apotheosis in Stalin’s drive for
world domination. It was clear from the huge volume of contemporary references to Kennan’s most
inflammatory conclusions, that a “new orthodoxy”
was about to grip the Washington establishment
(Walker). According to this new orthodoxy, all
Soviet efforts on “an international plane” would
henceforth be perceived as “negative and destructive in character, designed to tear down sources of
strength beyond Soviet control” (Kennan).
Proceeding from the conclusions of the Long
Telegram, the policymaking machinery of the executive branch swung into action. Within only twelve
months, Congress released $400 million to shore up
the vulnerable Greek and Turkish economies against
the apparent danger of those countries falling to
Communist coups d’état like their neighbors in
Eastern Europe. This unprecedented, preemptive
move, which reversed decades of cherished U.S.
“isolationism,” was premised on President Truman’s
belief that “it must be the policy of the United States
to support free peoples who are resisting attempted
subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures,” and revealed very clearly just how pervasive
had been the influence of Kennan’s uncompromising interpretation of Soviet foreign policy. Events in
Europe, Asia, and the Far East served to confirm
Americans’ worst fears. Between 1946 and 1950,
repressive Communist regimes came to power in
Poland, Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria, and Czechoslovakia, thus bringing those countries within the

Cold War

Soviet “sphere of influence,” and powerful domestic
Left movements came to prominence in Greece,
France, and Italy. Accordingly, the “loss” of China to
Mao Tse-tung’s Communist insurgents—a “loss”
that was blamed on treacherous leftist elements
within the U.S. State Department’s Far East office
by McCarthy and others—and the Soviet blockade
of West Berlin were met with a relentless hardening
of U.S. foreign policy. The increasing firmness of the
U.S. response can be charted in initiatives ranging
from Secretary of State George Marshall’s plan for
economic recovery in Europe (announced in June
1947)—a program that Stalin viewed, with some justice, as a conspiratorial means of flooding the wartorn continent with U.S. capital—to the establishment of what would soon become vitally important
weapons in the U.S. cold war arsenal such as the
CIA, the National Security Council (NSC), and the
U.S.-dominated North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO; all 1947). Perhaps most far-reaching of all
was the eventual acceptance by Congress and executive branches alike of the conclusions of NSC
memorandum no. 68 (NSC-68; 1950), which one
historian of the period describes as “the supreme
documentary symbol of the cold war” (Lucas). In
NSC-68 the principle of “containment”—another
Kennan coinage—became the justification both for
the “stockpiling” of a huge nuclear deterrent and for
the pursuit of a so-called arms race between the
United States and the Soviet Union under the terms
of which many billions of dollars were committed by
both sides to the development of intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM) technology, atomic weapons,
and the space program.
It was in defense of the United States’ selfappointed “responsibility of world leadership,”
(NSC-68) and of a repressive, unrepresentative,
but crucially noncommunist regime that South
Korea became the first of many U.S. theaters of
“proxy” conflict with the Soviet Union in the summer of 1950. As Eisenhower and Secretary of State
John Foster Dulles implied in their aggressive
campaign rhetoric of “rolling back” the Soviet and
Chinese advance, U.S. intervention in Korea signaled the institutionalization of the cold war as a
“system of international control” (Walker).

“Red Menace” and the
Rhetoric of Conspiracy
Crucial to U.S. prosecution of the cold war was the
strategic deployment of the findings of certain key
policy-documents—including the Long Telegram,
the text of the Truman Doctrine, the Marshall
Plan, and NSC-68—which became statements of
apparently unarguable truth in an atmosphere otherwise characterized by fear, uncertainty, global
confrontation, and propaganda. The language of
these documents made recurrent use of an elaborate repertoire of vocabulary and metaphor to
which elected and independent representatives
alike had frequent recourse in their public pronouncements and utterances. Thus, in this oppressive discursive climate—and lent weight by the
domestic anticommunist crusade—the “fundamental design” of the Kremlin’s “grim oligarchy”
was inevitably portrayed as being bent on “the ultimate elimination of any effective opposition to
their authority,” while the “fundamental purpose”
of the United States was always in transparent
defense of “the idea of freedom” and democracy
(NSC-68, 1950).
Both camps soon came to view the enemy as not
just antipathetic to, but in league against them. In
effect, this self-perpetuating and wholly enclosing
discursive system represented the elevation of widespread conspiracy theorizing to an unprecedented
level of political legitimacy. Certainly, this pan-social
susceptibility to conspiratorial interpretation during
the cold war helps account for the extraordinary
celebrity enjoyed by rabid anticommunists like Senator Joseph McCarthy, FBI director J. Edgar
Hoover, Vice-President Richard Nixon, and star witnesses such as Whittaker Chambers and Elizabeth
Bentley. Such an atmosphere also goes some way
toward explaining the enormous commercial success of exaggerated, allegorical depictions of the
“red menace” in popular contemporary movies and
fictions such as I Married a Communist (Dir. Jack
Gross, 1949), Invaders from Mars (Dir. William
Menzies, 1953), Invasion of the Body Snatchers
(Dir. Don Siegel, 1956), and Richard Condon’s
novel, The Manchurian Candidate (1959). As a matter of course, vocabulary and methods developed in
191

Chatting before their tour of the American National Exhibition in Moscow on 24 July 1959, are American and Soviet dignitaries, U.S.Vice President Richard Nixon, Soviet President Klimenti Voroshilov, and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
During the tour, Nixon and Khrushchev engaged in a running debate in the presence of hundreds of reporters and officials on subjects ranging from washing machines to rockets. (Bettmann/Corbis)

192

Cold War

the geopolitical sphere were vigorously—and profitably—reapplied on the home front; likewise the
vital importance of the domestic anticommunist
campaign was constantly reinforced by events on the
global stage. This reciprocal process has been
likened by some cultural historians to a kind of
“feedback loop,” and by others to a species of modern “hysterical epidemic” (Showalter).
The U.S. Government in Conspiracy during
the Later Years of the Cold War
The fervent pitch of political discourse during the
early cold war years was undoubtedly conducive to
popular fears of a Communist conspiracy on the
home front, in former strongholds of New Deal progressivism such as the trade union movement and
the Hollywood movie industry, and abroad in the
actions of seemingly inscrutable cultures like the
Soviet Union, China, North Korea, and North Vietnam. In this climate it is hardly surprising that for the
first fifteen years after World War II there was very
little public dissent from the prevailing consensus of
support for U.S. anticommunism in the public
sphere. This is not to say, however, that there was no
resistance. Both the Truman and Eisenhower
administrations faced intense criticism from what
remained of the U.S. Left, which continued to argue
from a largely prewar perspective. For these conspiracy theorists of the “Old Left,” blame for the cold
war lay squarely with the forces of militarism and
imperialism in Washington, whose interests were
directly antagonistic to those of the working masses.
It is interesting to note that this basic proposition,
stripped of its Marxist agenda, lies at the root of a
good deal of contemporary conspiracy-thinking—
both popular and scholarly, in print and on the Internet—so much of which starts from a basic suspicion
of the U.S. establishment.
It took several years and a complex series of
developments for large numbers of Americans to
begin to turn away from the external conspiracy
posited during the cold war and to focus instead on
the responsibility borne by their own leaders at
home. Among these developments were, ironically,
the grim predictions of an outgoing president, the
inauguration of the young and apparently radical

figure of John F. Kennedy in his place, and the latter’s subsequent tragic death. Gradually, a popular
and dynamic opposition movement peopled by
civil rights activists, “New Leftists,” pacifists, and
countercultural gurus began to rediscover the writings of their predecessors, and to point an accusing
finger at the dangerously unchecked power and
converging interests of their own ruling elite.
For all his professed commitment to a new era of
global harmony and the partial success of his gestures toward diplomacy between the superpowers,
President Kennedy was, in the final analysis, no less
dedicated a cold warrior than Truman or Eisenhower had been. As conspiracy-minded critics on
the Left like Norman Mailer and Corliss Lamont
recognized at the time, Kennedy’s deployment of
the forces of U.S. intelligence and covert operations
against socialist regimes in Cuba and elsewhere relied upon a further expansion of the already extensive mandate of largely unaccountable branches of
the “invisible government,” such as the CIA and
military intelligence. Predictably, the rhetoric used
by Kennedy and his new team of advisors to justify
this policy invoked the ever-present threat of Communist expansion. This time, however, the rhetoric
was more strident, the desire to roll back communism, particularly in the Third World, more urgent
than ever. Potent symbols of this increased intensity
were the construction of the Berlin Wall—that most
concrete embodiment of the intractable opposition
between East and West—in 1961, and the tense
brinkmanship of the Cuban Missile Crisis the following year.
The obsessive cold war worldview of Kennedy’s
successor, Lyndon Johnson, found expression in his
rapid escalation of U.S. commitment of air power
and troops in Southeast Asia. Like its precursor in
Korea, the Vietnam War reminded many that the
underlying assumption and overriding priority of
U.S. foreign policy during the 1960s remained the
prevention of the onward march of Communist
expansion. However, the disastrous adventures in
Vietnam and other Asian states also ushered in an
era of unprecedented popular revolt against these
guiding assumptions. As both Johnson and his successor, Richard Nixon, later acknowledged, it
193

Cold War

became quite clear during the late 1960s and early
1970s that the ruling elite could no longer command society-wide support for their policies and
for the conspiratorial interpretation of the Communist threat on which they were based. Indeed,
for many groups and individuals, including the Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), the Black
Panther Party (BPP), Eldridge Cleaver, Carl
Oglesby, and Jerry Rubin, all of whom rose to
prominence as critics of the government in this
period, it was no longer “alien” external forces who
were in league against them, but the very establishment of government itself. From that point forward, virtually every U.S. foreign policy initiative
with discernible origins in the high–cold war era
met with resistance from a vocal protest movement
at home. For these dissenters the conspiratorial
hand of the “military-industrial complex” and big
business was discernible behind everything from
the bombing of North Vietnam and Cambodia,
through revelations of institutional foul play during
the Watergate investigations, to the massive
nuclear rearmament program and “Reagan Doctrine” of the 1980s. (Indeed, the latter drew selfconsciously on the precedent set by the Truman
administration to sanction intervention on the side
of anticommunist forces in Nicaragua, Grenada,
Afghanistan, and Angola.) Many of these dire suspicions have since been borne out by legal and
scholarly investigation into scandals like the covert
CIA funding of Nicaraguan drug-runners, Panamanian dictators, and General Pinochet’s corrupt
and repressive regime in Chile.
The Cold War as a Source of
Contemporary Conspiracy Culture
The huge upsurge in conspiracy-thinking over the
past twenty to thirty years has been indebted to veterans of that pioneering generation of social critics
who came to the fore during the 1960s, including
Noam Chomsky, Herbert Marcuse, Norman
Mailer, Tom Hayden, and Black Power leaders like
Eldridge Cleaver and Stokely Carmichael. Many of
these theorists began their careers exposing the
activities of a Washington elite of planners, advisors,
and policymakers in the State and Defense Depart194

ments, Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), Council on Foreign Relations (CFR), NSC, CIA, and FBI for their
lack of accountability and for the dramatic failure of
U.S. domestic policy and foreign interventions in
Cuba, Vietnam, and elsewhere. The work of these
critics, and of others at the further fringes of the
late-1960s counterculture may now be seen to have
set in motion conspiratorial interpretations of a
whole panoply of postwar policies and developments. Nowadays, conspiratorial interpretations of
the cold war period incorporate everything from
the dryly political to the frankly bizarre. These
range from the counterculture’s generalized challenge to cold war norms of thought and behavior,
through the Black Panthers’ exposure of the conspiracy of white supremacy and radical feminism’s
critique of institutionalized and domestic chauvinism, to recurrent suspicions of the sinister interconnections between Washington and the international
“shadow government” like the Bilderberg group
and the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
and of the more baroque techniques allegedly used
during the cold war such as assassination plots, psychological warfare, mind-control experiments, and
investigations into possible UFO landings.
Fears of the conspiratorial power and influence
wielded by a shady “deep political” elite during the
cold war were partially borne out by the findings of
the Select Committee on Intelligence Activities in
1976, and more recently by the opening of archives
related to the various intelligence agencies. What
these disclosures made clear was something longsuspected by opponents of the U.S. government,
which is to say that U.S. foreign policy in the early
postwar period was dominated by an inner caucus of
dedicated and virtually omnipotent cold warriors.
The huge extent of this group’s power and their continuing resistance to public scrutiny undoubtedly
validates claims made by conspiracy theorists like
Peter Dale Scott, Anthony Summers, and John
Newman who discern the outlines of a system that
“habitually resorts to decision-making and enforcement procedures outside as well as inside those publicly sanctioned by law and society” (Scott). If the
many heterogeneous manifestations of contemporary U.S. conspiracy culture have any single feature

Cold War

in common, it is that they all seek to confront, sometimes explicitly, sometimes not, previously held
“truths” developed by the “power elite” during the
cold war. In this way, the original McCarthyite premise that the United States was besieged by “aliens”
without and subversives within has been inverted so
that the very forces mobilized in the name of the
cold war crusade—forces that were quickly naturalized as vital and integral components of that campaign—have come to represent the greatest threat
both to the domestic order and to geopolitical stability. It now seems most likely, as Richard Powers and
Daniel Moynihan argue in Secrecy: The American
Experience (1998), that the U.S cold war campaign
was driven by an all-powerful bureaucracy within the
CIA and other organizations who had a vested interest in systematically overestimating the threat posed
by the Soviet Union and its agents to the United
States, and in maintaining a veneer of secrecy that
vastly increased the sense of public unease and
propensity to conspiratorial interpretations of the
outside world.
Dorian Hayes
See also: Anticommunism; Area 51; Atomic
Secrets; Bay of Pigs Invasion; Bilderbergers; Black
Panthers; Central Intelligence Agency; Chambers,
Whittaker; COINTELPRO; Council on Foreign
Relations; Cuban Missile Crisis; Federal Bureau of
Investigation; Hiss, Alger; Hoover, J. Edgar; House
Un-American Activities Committee; LSD; Mailer,
Norman; The Manchurian Candidate; McCarthy,
Joseph; Mind Control; Students for a Democratic
Society; Watergate.
References
Ambrose, Stephen E., and Douglas Brinkley. [1971]
1993. Rise to Globalism: American Foreign Policy
since 1938. 7th ed. London: Penguin.
Boyer, Paul. 1985. By the Bomb’s Early Light:
American Thought and Culture at the Dawn of
the Atomic Age. London: Pantheon.
Brands, H. W. 1993. The Devil We Knew: Americans
and the Cold War. 1993. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Chomsky, Noam. 1969. American Power and the
New Mandarins. Harmondsworth, England:
Penguin.
———. 1973. For Reasons of State. London:
Fontana.

Crockatt, Richard. 1995. The Fifty Years War: The
United States and the Soviet Union in World
Politics, 1941–1991. London: Routledge.
Engelhart, Tom. 1995. The End of Victory Culture:
Cold War America and the Disillusioning of a
Generation. New York: Basic Books.
Fenster, Mark. 1999. Conspiracy Theories: Secrecy
and Power in American Culture. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Gaddis, John Lewis. 1987. The Long Peace:
Inquiries into the History of the Cold War. New
York: Oxford University Press.
———. 1997. We Now Know: Rethinking Cold War
History. New York: Oxford University Press.
Henrikson, Margot A. 1997. Dr. Strangelove’s
America: Society and Culture in the Atomic Age.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Lafeber, Walter. [1967] 1997. America, Russia and
the Cold War, 1945–1996. 8th ed. New York and
London: McGraw-Hill.
Leffler, Melvin. 1993. A Preponderance of Power.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Lippmann, Walter, ed. 1972. The Cold War: A Study
in US Foreign Policy. New York: Harper and
Row.
Lucas, Scott. 1996. “The Psychological Strategy
Board.” International History Review 18 (May):
279–302.
Moynihan, Daniel Patrick. 1998. Secrecy: The
American Experience. Intro. by Richard Powers.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Newman, John. 1992. JFK and Vietnam. New York:
Warner.
Saunders, Frances Stonor. 1999. Who Paid the
Piper? The CIA and the Cultural Cold War.
London: Granta.
Scott, Peter Dale. Crime and Cover-Up: The CIA,
the Mafia, and the Dallas-Watergate Connection.
Berkeley, CA: Westworks.
Showalter, Elaine. 1997. Hystories: Hysterical
Epidemics and Modern Culture. London:
Picador.
U.S. Department of State. 1952–1972. Foreign
Relations of the United States. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Senate. 1976. Select Committee to Study
Governmental Operations with Respect to
Intelligence Activities (the “Church Committee”).
Final Report. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Walker, Martin. 1993. The Cold War and the
Making of the Modern World. London: Fourth
Estate.

195

Constitution, U.S.

Websites
Above Top Secret: http://www.abovetopsecret.com.
Parascope: http://www.parascope.com.

Constitution, U.S.
The Constitution of the United States of America
was, at the time of its ratification in 1787–1788, the
focus of a conspiracy theory that interpreted the
new political system as a deliberate effort to
reverse the liberty won in the American Revolution. Contemporary conspiracy theories concerned
with the Constitution, however, are more likely to
see a plot to enforce an illegal, centralist interpretation of the Constitution, while at the same time
clinging to the individual liberties asserted in the
Bill of Rights.
Radical Anti-Federalists and
Constitutional Ratification
When the U.S. Constitution was drafted in Philadelphia in 1787 and subsequently ratified by conventions in the several states, it replaced the existing
political system of the Articles of Confederation,
which mandated a very limited form of federal government and left most powers to the states. A vocal
group of nationalist politicians had long argued in
favor of a stronger federal government, and had successfully persuaded Congress to call for a Federal
Convention in order to revise the Articles of Confederation. Fearing a nationalist plot, some prominent revolutionary leaders like Samuel Adams
protested against the Federal Convention and
declined to serve as delegates; Patrick Henry
refused to participate because he “smelt a rat.” Their
fears were proven partially right when the Convention produced not a revision of the Articles of Confederation, but an entirely new constitution.
Drawing on revolutionary traditions, opponents
of the Constitution—known during the ratification
years as Anti-Federalists—argued that centralized
power was inherently corrupt and that the Constitution would serve to eliminate the states’ autonomy along with individual liberty. In a worst-case
scenario they feared this would create the despotic
government that Americans had fought the British
196

to prevent. Radical Anti-Federalists went so far as
to interpret the Constitution as the tool of a conspiracy fomented by the Society of the Cincinnati,
an organization of veteran Revolutionary War officers, to introduce a hereditary aristocracy or even a
monarchy in the United States. Such radical and
also more moderate charges had considerable
impact on the ratification procedure. In several
states, the Constitution was ratified by a narrow
majority, and only after urging various changes that
were later condensed into the Bill of Rights of 1791.
Contemporary Conspiracy
Theories of Constitutional Decay
In the more than two hundred years since ratification, the Constitution has grown into one of the most
venerated symbols of the United States, to the point
where it is practically impossible to reject the Constitution and still make a claim to patriotism. As a
result, contemporary conspiracy-minded critics of
strong federal power typically do not attack the Constitution per se, but put forward conspiracy theories
that claim the Constitution has been deliberately
misinterpreted, subverted, or ignored, to the point
where the result is harmful to the freedom of U.S.
citizens. Such conspiracy theories of constitutional
subversion are most typically endorsed by right-wing
religious or libertarian groups and individuals, who
feel that the federal government in the course of the
twentieth century became the tool of secularism,
social collectivism, feminism, multiculturalism, and
racial equality.
In The Constitution: Fact or Fiction, Eugene
Schroder of Colorado claimed that the U.S. Constitution has effectively been suspended since
1933. Franklin D. Roosevelt allegedly assumed
emergency powers that have been expanded by
successive administrations, who justified increased
executive federal power with the necessities of
World War II and the cold war. Consequently,
Schroder claimed, Americans have lived under
martial law for many decades. Likewise, members
of the diverse militia movement that came to the
attention of the U.S. Congress in the 1990s often
argue that while they are patriots who believe in
the Constitution, the political order of the United

Contrails

States has been perverted away from its original
meaning. These critics point to legal abortions,
gun-control laws, federal social programs, and the
United Nations as signs of such corruption, and in
many cases claim it to be the work of Jewish or
Satanic conspirators. Some groups, such as the
Posse Comitatus, react with oppositional readings
of the Constitution, claiming the right of sovereign
citizenship and accepting no legitimate government above the county level. At the same time, it is
often claimed that no constitutional amendments
beyond the first ten are actually valid.
The Bill of Rights plays a central role in the conspiracy theories and fears of the contemporary
Right. While many groups and activists reject the
structure of the federal government, or at least its
contemporary role, they are highly concerned
about freedom of speech and freedom of religion,
the right to bear arms, and the protection against
unreasonable searches and seizures, which are
guaranteed by the First, Second, and Fourth
Amendments, respectively. Activists point to the
actions of federal law enforcement at Waco, Texas,
and Ruby Ridge, Idaho, as examples of the suspension of constitutional rights by a conspiratorial elite
deeply entrenched in the power structure of the
federal government. The Second Amendment is
often seen as the constitutional right most attacked
by conspiratorial forces. Even though the amendment was originally intended in order to guarantee
the states some military autonomy, activist groups
like the National Rifle Association insist on an
unrestricted individual right to bear arms. In the
conspiracy theories of the militia movement and
other right-wing and libertarian groups, it is one of
the most urgent interests of conspirators in the federal government to disarm the U.S. people through
gun-control legislation and the use of federal law
enforcement agencies such as the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms.
The eighteenth- and twentieth-century conspiracy theories about the Constitution stem from similar roots. While radical Anti-Federalists attacked
the Constitution itself, contemporary right-wing
and libertarian conspiracy theorists attack the
present-day constitutional reality. They offer an

alternative reading of the Constitution that
revolves strongly around the Bill of Rights, which
was a major Anti-Federalist achievement in the
first place. However, while conspiracy-minded
radicals constituted only a slight minority of AntiFederalists and eventually reconciled themselves
to the new political system, the ubiquity of conspiracy theory among the contemporary Right
does not seem to offer a similar perspective.
Markus Hünemörder
See also: American Revolution; Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, and Firearms; Militias; National Rifle
Association; Posse Comitatus; Ruby Ridge Incident;
Society of the Cincinnati; Waco.
References
The Constitution Society. “Abuses and Usurpations.”
http://www.constitution.org/cs_abuse.htm.
Main, Jackson Turner. 1961. The Antifederalists:
Critics of the Constitution, 1781–1788. Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Schroder, Eugene, and Micki Nellis. 1995.
Constitution, Fact or Fiction: The Story of the
Nation’s Descent from a Constitutional Republic
through a Constitutional Dictatorship to an
Unconstitutional Dictatorship. Cleburne, TX:
Buffalo Creek Press.
Stern, Kenneth. 1996. A Force upon the Plain: The
American Militia Movement and the Politics of
Hate. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Contrails
A contrail, also known as a chemtrail, is a type of
cloud that is formed from the vapor contained in
the exhaust of a jet when it is flying at high enough
altitudes for cold temperatures to cause the vapor
to turn into ice crystals like cirrus clouds. These
clouds are called “contrails” (short for “condensation trails”) and look like lines in the sky. They are
also called “chemtrails,” because it is alleged that
chemicals are sprayed deliberately into the atmosphere in order to conduct experiments involving
weather control or communications systems or to
test compounds on the human populations and
natural life below.
Activists who highlight the issue usually allege
that epidemics of flu-like illnesses follow sightings
of contrail patterns; sometimes the symptoms
197

Contrails

include diarrhea, listlessness, and fevers. Entering
“contrail” and/or “chemtrail” into a search engine
reveals hundreds of websites that report on the
issue, providing eyewitness accounts and photographs taken all over North America, with some
reports from Australia and Europe; there are no
books on the subject to date. Reports on contrails
are carried by dedicated websites, such as Chemtrails Central, and also by many sites of a rightwing/“Patriot” nature, such as Chemtrails over
America (COA), which carries articles originally
published in the Spotlight and is closely linked to its
successor organization, the American Free Press.
Mainstream news agencies rarely report on concerns over contrails, and when they do it is in terms
of antigovernment “paranoia.” When USA Today
ran a contrail story it likened the story to something
out of The X-Files, arguing that it was only those
who are suspicious of the government who believe
that lines in the sky are evidence of malfeasance.
Some suggested that they are trying to slow down
global warming with compounds that reflect sunlight into the sky. More ominous theories suggested
a government campaign to weed out the old and
sick. The report concluded, “Nothing is ‘out there’
except water vapor and ice crystals, say irritated scientists who study contrails.” An atmospheric scientist was quoted as saying that the issue is “Conspiracy nonsense. . . . These things are at 30,000 to
40,000 feet in the atmosphere. They’re tiny particles. They’re not going to affect anyone.” Nevertheless, in June 2001 a group called Ohio Citizens
Against Chemtrails staged a protest outside the
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, in Dayton, Ohio.
There are essentially five different types of
application that may be implicated by contrail evidence. The first is the high-altitude spraying of
aerosols that will help block the sun’s radiation,
thus addressing the problems associated with holes
in the ozone layer of the earth’s atmosphere and
global warming. The second is a military program
called the Radio Frequency Mission Planner
(RFMP), which allows 3-D images of would-be
battle scenes to be viewed on computer screens.
This requires atmospheric “ducting” of radar
waves, which can be achieved over land only
198

through the spraying of a barium salt aerosol;
straight lines of ducting material in the air may also
facilitate high-frequency communications along the
path of the contrail. Such systems were allegedly
used during the Gulf War, according to COA. The
third application involves weather manipulation,
again using barium salts, utilizing HAARP technology and microwaves. COA believes that the Jet
Stream has been controlled in this way and that
such technology allows a military to “bring any
country to its knees without firing a shot.” Declassified minutes from an Air Ministry meeting held
in the War Office in Britain in 1953 indicated that
military planners have thought along the same
lines. They also considered “seeding” clouds before
using nuclear weapons, in order to widen the area
of radiation contamination on enemy soil. Fourth,
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) involves the testing of biological detection and decontamination systems. Chemicals
including barium salt and polymer fibers have
caused human illnesses and diseases, which can be
assessed by scientists. Fifth, it has been suggested
that the testing of a new generation of high-altitude
jets by the U.S. Air Force (code-named Aurora)
may cause contrails. These jets, apparently able to
reach Mach 6, use a new type of propulsion system
called Pulse Wave Detonation Engine (PWDE),
which causes unusual types of contrails.
Some radio hosts have given sympathetic hearings to those who claim that sickness often follows
the sighting of extensive contrail patterns in the
sky; both Art Bell and Jeff Rense have sections of
their websites dedicated to the subject. The American Reporter (12 January 1999) carried an article
in which a Washington State resident was quoted
as speculating whether ethylene dibromide, a
highly toxic component of JP-8 jet fuel, is making
people sick. The report stated, “Similar incidents
over Las Vegas last year prompted a U.S. Air Force
spokesman to explain that the military aircraft were
‘dumping fuel’ before landing.” The same Washington resident was also cited in a report in the
Daily Telegraph (London), 31 January 1999. The
website Conspiracy Planet suggests that “these
trails do not dissipate as vapor trails do, but rather

The Conway Cabal

spread, eventually forming a cloud that sometimes
fill the sky for days with the residues of the materials being released.” The same site linked the spate
of stillbirths of horses in Kentucky during the summer of 2001 to chemtrail spraying by high-altitude
military aircraft.
Concern over contrails appears to tie in with more
deep-rooted suspicion toward government. The
antisemitic publication the Spotlight claimed that
“chemtrails are part of a massive top-secret military
research and development project, possibly linked
to the United Nations.” The report refers to the
findings of a group of experts (unnamed in this
report, but presumably the same ones listed on the
COA website) who concluded that both military and
commercial aircraft are being used to disperse
chemical substances for a project known as Operation Cloverleaf. This project apparently brings
together scientists from around the world under the
auspices of an organization known only as Commission G. The Spotlight’s experts linked this research
to the “nationwide epidemic increase in cases of
asthma, allergies, and upper respiratory illnesses,
including pneumonia.” The report betrayed something of a scattergun approach, also linking the issue
to the development of radar cloaking technology,
biological weapons, weather modification as a military weapon, space weaponry, and the High Frequency Active Auroral Research Project (HAARP),
first developed by Nicola Tesla, and again linked to
the United Nations. HAARP ionospheric “heaters”
are used to heat and modify the ionosphere and the
results are evaluated at various U.S. Air Force bases
and universities. A researcher is quoted explaining,
“Precipitation suppression and enhancement are
strategies being refined specifically for implementation in the conduct of future wars.” The report also
alleges that “potential chemical and electrical influence on human behavior from above, a super-MKULTRA-mind-control program” is being developed.
It is beyond doubt that “cloud seeding” experiments have taken place in the past: between 1949
and 1955 the British Royal Air Force conducted
Operation Cumulus, in which chemicals provided
by ICI, including salt, dry ice, and silver iodide,
were sprayed on clouds in order to produce rain

(although this was denied by the Ministry of
Defense until papers were declassified in 2001). In
1952 one of these experiments caused a flash flood
in the village of Lymouth, Devon, in which thirtyfive people were killed.
Nigel James
See also: MK-ULTRA; United Nations.
References
Spotlight. 2000. “Chemtrails Said Part of Top Secret
Military Maneuvers over America.” Reprinted in
Free American (December): 32.
USA Today. 2001. “Conspiracy Theorists Read
between Lines in the Sky.” 7 March.
Vidal, J,. and H. Weinstein. 2001. “RAF Rainmakers
Blamed for 1952 Flood.” Guardian (London). 30
August.
Websites
Art Bell: http://www.artbell.com/contrails.html.
Chemtrail Central: http://www.chemtrailcentral.
com/.
Chemtrail Crimes and Cover-ups Documented:
http://www.carnicom.com/contrails.htm.
Chemtrails over America: http://home1.gte.net/
quakker/Documents/Chemtrails_Over_America.
htm.
Conspiracy Planet: http://www.conspiracyplanet.
com/.
Jeff Rense: http://www.rense.com/politics6/
chemdatapage.html.

The Conway Cabal
The Conway Cabal was a conspiratorial attempt to
remove General George Washington as the Continental Army’s commander-in-chief in favor of General Horatio Gates, thus setting the stage for a
negotiated settlement to end the American Revolution during the fall and winter of 1777 and 1778.
Washington and his closest allies in Congress recognized it as an attempt to end the war without
first securing a British recognition of American
independence. The effort to remove General
Washington came at a crucial time during the war.
Since taking on the assignment as commander-inchief of the Continental Army, Washington had few
successes to call his own, with the exception of two
minor victories at Trenton and Princeton in the
winter of 1776–1777. As the spring campaigns
199

The Conway Cabal

began, British General John Burgoyne launched an
ambitious plan to sever New England from the rest
of the new country, while General William Howe
set his sights on the American capital, Philadelphia.
The ensuing British occupation of Philadelphia
established a situation conducive toward a negotiated end of the war, something that both General
Howe and the more conservative members of Congress desired. Such goals withered away as it
became increasingly apparent that Washington and
his closest allies in Congress were not going to
allow for a negotiated settlement that did not first
recognize American independence.
Opposition against Washington in Congress had
been brewing for some time. Members of the New
England delegation were critical of the general’s
inability to achieve a decisive victory against the
British. As the war entered its second year, their
criticism became increasingly loud, as they made it
abundantly clear that the time had come for a new
commander-in-chief. Following British General
John Burgoyne’s surrender at Saratoga in October
1777, Washington’s strongest congressional critics
became convinced that they had found the man to
replace him—General Horatio Gates, the “hero of
Saratoga.” Gates’s newfound status as savior of the
Revolution enhanced the ambitions of many men
who surrounded him, and they hoped to advance
their own careers on the general’s coattails.
Thomas Conway, whose name was later given to
the conspiracy, was one such individual. Conway
was of Irish-French origin, and he received a commission in the Continental Army from Silas Deane,
an American diplomat stationed in France. Deane,
much to Washington’s chagrin, started awarding
positions to a large coterie of foreign officers in the
Continental Army without the prior approval of
Washington or Congress. General Thomas Conway
was one such individual who sought advancement,
but soon realized that his opportunities were limited as long as Washington was commander-inchief. Conway gravitated toward those who rallied
around General Horatio Gates, who also had influential friends in Congress. In late October 1777,
Conway addressed a letter to Gates that contained
disparaging references to Washington’s abilities as
200

a military leader, stating, “heaven has been determined to save your country; or a weak General and
bad Councilors would have ruined it.” When the
existence of the letter was brought to Washington’s
attention, he confronted Gates and the conspiracy
began to unravel, but the matter was not put to rest
completely until the beginning of spring 1778.
The concerns raised by members of the New
England delegation and the ambitions of men like
Thomas Conway played into the interests of the
more conservative members of Congress who
believed that a negotiated settlement was the best
that the Americans could hope to achieve. Washington and his allies in Congress, however, represented the biggest obstacles in their path. Many of
these individuals already had close ties with Horatio Gates, and they were convinced that he would
be more supportive of seeking a negotiated peace
with the British. Gates’s identification as the “hero
of Saratoga” made him a strong candidate to
replace Washington.
The conspiracy unraveled as Washington and his
allies in Congress closed ranks and resisted any
serious attempt to remove him as commander-inchief. The divergent and conflicting interests of
those who desired Washington’s removal prevented
them from mounting a sustained challenge against
the general. They were united only by their shared
desire to remove Washington as commander-inchief, but they sought this goal for opposing reasons—the general’s New England critics thought
that by replacing Washington with Gates, independence would be assured; the conservatives in Congress thought that by removing Washington, the
stage would be set for a negotiated end to the war.
Consequently the conspiracy failed.
J. Kent McGaughy
See also: American Revolution.
References
Martin, James Kirby. 1979. In the Course of Human
Events: An Interpretive Exploration of the
American Revolution. Wheeling, IL: Harlan
Davidson.
Martin, James Kirby, and Mark Edward Lender.
1982. A Respectable Army: The Military Origins
of the Republic, 1763–1789. Wheeling, IL: Harlan
Davidson.

Copperheads

Pancake, John S. 1977. 1777: The Year of the
Hangman. Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama
Press.

Copperheads
Northern Democratic critics of the Lincoln administration’s policy during the Civil War were known
as Copperheads and were repeatedly linked to conspiracies to disrupt northern military operations
and to help establish the independence of the Confederate States of America.
Named after the venomous snake, Copperheads
were considered traitors to the Union and were
accused by Republicans of creating a civil war
within the Civil War. While many Democrats were
critical of Republican policies pursued during the
war, the vast majority of Democrats remained loyal
to the Union cause. Seeking partisan advantage at
the polls, many Republican political leaders transformed Democratic criticism of the war into disloyalty. Associating the Democrats with such secret
societies as the Knights of the Golden Circle, the
Order of American Knights, and the Sons of Liberty, Republicans repeatedly linked the Democratic Party with alleged conspiracies to disrupt the
war effort and permanently divide the nation.
Democratic dissent about Republican war policies was not fictitious. While Democrats had rallied
to the flag in the aftermath of the firing on Fort
Sumter, Republican policies on emancipation and
civil liberties quickly raised doubts about the effect
the war was having on U.S. society. President Lincoln’s preliminary Emancipation Proclamation,
issued shortly after the battle of Antietam, caused
Democratic politicians and newspaper editors to
vigorously criticize the administration’s war policies.
Believing in the “Constitution as it is and the Union
as it was,” leading Democratic politicians such as
Ohio’s Clement Vallandigham and Indiana’s Daniel
W. Voorhees charged that the war was now being
waged for racial equality. Democratic newspaper
editors, such as Charles Lanphier of the Illinois
State Register, Samuel Medary of the Columbus,
Ohio, Crisis, and Wilbur Storey of the Chicago
Times raised the issue of racial amalgamation along

with the threat of economic displacement for white,
particularly Irish, workers. President Lincoln’s suspension of the writ of habeas corpus along with the
arbitrary arrest and imprisonment of a few prominent Democrats, such as Dennis Mahoney, editor
of the Dubuque, Iowa, Herald, raised fears that
U.S. traditions of individual rights were being supplanted by military despotism.
Economic depression in the agricultural lower
Midwest also fueled Democratic dissent. With the
closing of the Mississippi River, traditional trading
routes between the South and the lower Midwest
were disrupted. Farmers now had to ship their
product to market via the Great Lakes and northern railroads. Rising railroad rates cut into agricultural profits and raised complaints that the interests of the farming Midwest were being sacrificed
to northern capitalists. Combined with such measures as the Morrill Tariff, there emerged a robust
western sectionalism, articulated by Vallandigham,
Ohio’s Samuel “Sunset” Cox, Senator William A.
Richardson of Illinois, and Daniel Voorhees, that
was highly critical of “Puritan” New England and
northern manufacturing interests.
From practically the war’s beginning, eager
Republican newspaper editors and politicians
attempted to profit from Democratic war criticism
by painting the entire party as treasonous. One
strategy was to accuse Democrats of membership
in so-called secret or dark lantern societies. The
alleged treasonous societies were the Knights of
the Golden Circle (KGC), the Order of American
Knights (OAK), and a reconstituted Sons of Liberty (SOL). The Golden Circle was the invention
of George W. L. Blickley, a no-account drifter born
in Virginia who migrated to Cincinnati in the
1850s. The Order of American Knights was the
brainchild of Phineas G. Wright, a New York native
who was living in St. Louis when the Civil War
erupted. Harrison Dodd, a respectable Indianapolis Democrat who felt Democrats needed to counteract Republican propaganda, founded the Sons
of Liberty.
Republican newspaper editors, politicians, and
Union military officers wildly exaggerated the membership in all of these organizations. For instance,
201

Copperheads

Editorial cartoon showing three caricatured Copperheads advancing on Columbia, who holds a shield labeled “Union”
and a sword. (Library of Congress)

through the skillful propagandizing of Republican
governors Oliver Morton (Indiana) and Richard
Yates (Illinois), the Knights of the Golden Circle was
said to have thousands of members in Ohio, Indiana,
and Illinois; yet hardly any actual local organizations
were known to exist. Similarly, as a result of an
exposé written by John Sanderson, an aide to General William S. Rosecrans stationed in St. Louis, the
Order of American Knights was portrayed as a mass
organization with thousands of dedicated members.
In reality, the OAK had a few, isolated cells (temples)
located in the Midwest. Few, if any, prominent
Democrats belonged to these shadowy organizations.
Unlike the Knights of the Golden Circle and the
Order of American Knights, the Sons of Liberty
had slightly more credible membership. Formed to
counteract the Republican Union League, the Sons
were modeled after the patriotic organization of
202

the American Revolution. A number of prominent
Democrats were associated with the Sons of Liberty including Clement Vallandigham and S. Corning Judd, a popular Illinois Democrat. Concerned
that constitutional liberty might be a casualty of the
war, the main function of the Sons of Liberty was
to protect republicanism from the excesses of civil
war. Unfortunately the ill-timed actions of a few
foolhardy Democrats along with the eager propagandizing of Republican publicists gave credibility
to allegations of Democratic treason in such “plots”
as the Northwest Confederacy and the Camp Douglas uprising.
Charges that Democratic conspirators were plotting to separate the Midwestern states from New
England and form a Northwest Confederacy was a
common charge against the Democrats during the
war. Since 1864 was an election year, Republicans

Corporations

played up alleged plots of Democratic disloyalty for
partisan gain. One Republican governor eager to
seize opportunity was Oliver Morton of Indiana.
Using evidence gathered by Colonel Henry Carrington, Morton had a prominent group of Indiana
Democrats—Harrison Dodd and seven associates—
arrested and charged with treason. Eventually four
Democrats—Lambdin P. Milligan, William Bowles,
Stephen Horsey, and Andrew Humphrey—were
tried before a military court (while charged, Dodd
escaped and fled to Canada). While Felix Stidger, a
disreputable informant in the pay of Carrington,
manufactured the majority of the evidence, the military tribunal nevertheless convicted the defendants
and sentenced them to death. The Indianapolis treason trials gave Indiana Republicans a decided
advantage in the fall campaign.
Similarly the so-called Camp Douglas conspiracy
relied on manufactured evidence skillfully elicited
by unsuspecting and, in some cases, unintelligent
Democrats. The brainchild of Chicago Tribune president William Deacon Bross, the “Camp Douglas
conspiracy” was the alleged attempt of local Democrats, aided and abetted by Confederate agents, to
free thousands of Confederate prisoners of war
held at Camp Douglas in Chicago. The conspiracy
theory grew and was nurtured by I. Winslow Ayers,
a sleazy opportunist who hoped to profit from his
untruthful allegations. Eventually over 100 Democrats were arrested in Chicago in late 1864. In a
highly publicized treason trial conducted in Cincinnati in January 1865, only eight defendants were
charged: George St. Leger Grenfell, Benjamin
Anderson, Vincent Marmaduke, George Cantrell,
Charles T. Daniel, Charles Walsh, Buckner Morris,
and Richard T. Semmes. Tried before a military tribunal, only five of the defendants were convicted,
and only one, St. Leger Grenfell, was sentenced to
death.
In fact, no one convicted in any of the treason
trials was executed. No doubt realizing the essential sham character of the trial, President Andrew
Johnson eventually reduced death sentences to life
imprisonment for the defendants of the Indianapolis treason trials—Milligan, Bowles, and Horsey
(Humphrey had been freed earlier). In response to

a suit filed by Milligan, on 3 April, the Supreme
Court handed down ex parte Milligan, which
denied the legitimacy of military tribunals when
civilian courts were functioning. The three defendants were subsequently released on 12 April 1866.
Similarly, the Cincinnati Treason Trials defendants
found a measure of vindication. Of the five convicted defendants, one committed suicide (Anderson) and one (Daniels) escaped. Two defendants
were eventually pardoned and St. Leger Grenfell’s
death sentence was changed to life imprisonment.
The actions of federal officials after the war were a
candid acknowledgment of excesses committed in
the name of patriotism during the war.
For many years after the war, historians largely
accepted the Republican verdict that the Democratic Party constituted a disloyal minority. While a
few Democrats did belong to secret societies and
openly supported the Confederacy, the vast majority were loyal supporters of the war and patriotic
citizens. Opposed to emancipation and fiercely
committed to constitutional liberties, most Copperheads were not conspirators but a respectable
opposition party.
Bruce Tap
References
Curry, Richard O. 1972. “Copperheadism and
Continuity: The Anatomy of a Stereotype.”
Journal of Negro History 57: 29–36.
Klement, Frank L. 1972. The Copperheads in the
Middlewest. Gloucester, MA: Peter Smith.
———. 1984. Dark Lanterns: Secret Political
Societies, Conspiracies, and Treason Trials during
the Civil War. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
University Press.
Silbey, Joel. 1977. “A Respectable Minority”: The
Democratic Party in the Civil War Era,
1860–1868. New York: W. W. Norton and
Company.

Corporations
The corporation is a modern-day Frankenstein’s
monster at the heart of many contemporary versions of conspiracy. It is easy enough to demonstrate that many corporations avoid tax, fix prices
through cartels, knowingly sell dangerous products,
203

Corporations

engage in industrial espionage, deliberately mislead
people through their advertising, and covertly
attempt to influence state policies (Punch). It is also
evident that the majority of film representations of
corporations—Wall Street, Robocop, Other People’s
Money, and Erin Brockovich, to name but a few—
generally present corporations as Machiavellian
places in which dirty deals are done behind closed
doors (Parker). What is more difficult is to establish
that corporations are actually key conspirators in
destabilizing states that have policies that are hostile to corporate interests, or even engineer wars in
order to sell more weapons. This is an area where
the boundaries between enthusiastic business practice and illegal activity, as well as the boundaries
between the state and the corporation, are difficult
to distinguish.
Corporations are fictional entities, legally constructed nonhumans that are exempt from some of
the laws of a particular state. Like similar words—
“company,” “organization,” “association”—“corporation” is a word that refers to the collective activity of a group of individuals, usually those engaged
in some form of commercial business. (Note that
the root of the word “conspiracy” comes from
“breathing together”—again suggesting a collective
activity.) Given that within capitalist societies this
collective activity is usually aimed at maximizing
profitability, it is hardly surprising that corporations
should often be regarded as quasi-conspiratorial
arrangements almost by definition. It is “common
sense” that corporations are primarily motivated by
making profits, so whatever else they claim (about
caring for customers, employees, the environment,
and so on) is likely to be no more than a public relations exercise.
The first English corporations were charitable
institutions (hospitals, schools, and churches),
which used the legal framework of incorporation to
avoid death duties and other taxes. Having a license
from the Crown meant that, in certain defined circumstances—which did not initially include profit
making—they would be treated as different from
the people who inhabited them. When, by the end
of the sixteenth century, similar charters were
awarded to trade associations, this gradually led to
204

the construction of large profit-making companies
of shareholders such as the Company of Merchants
Adventurers (1505), and, perhaps the best known,
the East India Company with its vast transnational
reach.
While the Judeo-Christian world exemplifies a
sustained suspicion of businesspeople and their
organizations, from the moneylenders in the temple
to Shylock’s pound of flesh, it is in the United States
of the late nineteenth century that contemporary
corporate conspiracism fully emerges. Ambrose
Bierce, in his Devil’s Dictionary of 1911, defined the
corporation as “An ingenious device for obtaining
individual profit without individual responsibility”
(Bierce, 49). At that time, the organization of the
U.S. economy under the control of various corporate alliances known as “trusts” ensured that prices
for producer and consumer goods were set in
smoke-filled rooms and profits guaranteed. After
World War I had ended, the Great Depression, the
stock market crash, muckraking journalism, and
substantial attempts at union organization by the
Industrial Workers of the World and the CIO (Congress of Industrial Organizations), together with violent resistance to the corporate vested interests, all
turned this sense of unease into widespread social
concern. The brave promise of a United States of
social opportunity now sees the “little guy” suffering
under the new yoke of big organization. Social commentary books such as Matthew Josephson’s The
Robber Barons (1934) and many fictional works all
took aim at the new decadent U.S. aristocracy.
“In short order the railroad presidents, the copper barons, the big dry-goods merchants and the
steel masters became Senators, ruling in the highest councils of the national government, and sometimes scattered twenty-dollar gold pieces to the
newsboys of Washington. But they also became in
even greater number lay leaders of churches,
trustees of universities, partners or owners of
newspapers or press services and figures of fashionable, cultured society” (Josephson qtd. in Beder,
53). Ultimately, this diagnosis resulted in the New
Deal administration that attempted to enforce
antitrust legislation, unemployment insurance, and
a whole host of new regulatory bodies. The rise of

Corporations

the Progressive Party and the “trustbusters”—the
movement agitating against the industrial trusts—
was in some sense a response to the widespread
sense of corruption and collusion, and the perception that both big business and big politics were
effectively in each other’s pockets.
Although corporate conspiracism seems to have
faded somewhat after World War II, the reemergence of common ideas about corporate conspiracies in the 1970s is sometimes explained with
respect to the end of a broadly Keynesian welfare
state. It is also clear that the boundaries between big
money and big politics were again becoming permeable. The activities of Eisenhower’s “military-industrial complex” in making profits from U.S. foreign
policy, and the counterculture’s demonology of all
matters associated with the “one-dimensional society” of “organization man” (Whyte; Marcuse) set the
scene for a renewed suspicion of corporations that
has lasted up to the present day. In academic work
in the social sciences, the popularity of metaphors
like “McDonaldization” or “Coca-Colonization,”
combined with the enduring attraction of Marxist or
Weberian models of the state as a mediator of corporate power, has meant that (outside the business
school) corporations are generally regarded with
considerable hostility and scepticism.
In political and economic terms the 1970s saw
the beginning of the collapse of the social contract
and a return to the mode of permanent crisis which
had characterized the 1930s and 1940s. Margaret
Thatcher talked of “rolling back the state” and “giving managers the right to manage” while Ronald
Reagan promised to “get government off the backs
of the people.” It seemed that big business had
undergone its short period of rehabilitation, and
was now once again ready to challenge the rights of
workers (whether air traffic controllers or miners)
and the right of the state to regulate corporate activities. Or, perhaps as Noam Chomsky argues, this
was merely the public justification. The postwar
period illustrated that corporations had learned that
they could use the shelter of the state to shore up
their political legitimacy at the same time that they
were “feeding at the public trough” (Chomsky,
120). So this period was characterized by simulta-

neous protectionism and intervention—massive
“defense” spending combined with state subsidy
and/or tax relief to industries that were under
threat. None of these policies actually changed
much in the 1970s; the corporate trough remained
full while the language of market liberalism became
more strident and self-righteous (Frank).
The rise of concerns about business ethics and
social responsibility from the 1980s onward
reflected both liberal concerns about business
power, as well as a variety of attempts by corporations to claim the language of ethics and turn it to
a profit. Managers and organizations were now
falling over each other to make glossy public statements about equal opportunities policies; gender,
age, and ethnicity issues; social cost accounting;
environmental responsibility; community involvement and sponsorship; business scandals; whistleblowing; consumer redress; corporate governance,
and so on. There were also, of course, plenty of
consultants willing to help formulate these statements. Market liberals and theologians likewise
rapidly developed a stream of ideas that stressed
spirituality, soul, and the moral foundations of market institutions in favor of “back to basics” values
rooted in notions of community and responsibility.
In parallel, and over the last twenty years or so,
business ethics has become an accepted part of the
business school canon. Ethics is becoming a big
business itself, part of a long public relations campaign to relegitimize business in the face of widespread public unease.
The latest version of corporations as conspiratorial can be found in the contemporary anticorporate and anticapitalist protest movements. From
the 1970s onward, the Bretton Woods consensus
(the postwar international agreement on exchange
rates) was beginning to be unpicked and the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank
began acting as the emissaries of structural readjustment to market forces. Although there were
many attempts to expose corporate power in relation to global hegemony from the 1970s onward
(Barnet and Müller; Barnet and Cavanagh), it was
the 1999 “Battle in Seattle” that brought these
ideas to a much wider public. Since then, a rainbow
205

Corporations

alliance of activists have summit-hopped their way
around the meetings of the World Trade Organization and associated bodies in order to expose the
extent to which corporations are increasingly displacing states and their citizens in most areas of
decision making. The attempt to liberalize global
trade, sometimes misleadingly given the catchall
term “globalization,” has provoked massive discontent from left-wing radicals to right-wing protectionist nationalists (Spark). Critics suggest that
terms such as “liberalization” and “free trade” actually translate into the right of powerful corporations to determine state policies and prevent any
local attempts to protect wage rates, local skills,
and levels of taxation (Klein; Monbiot). The “freedom” being engineered by and for these global corporations is one that allows them to exploit any natural resource, labor force, or form of intellectual
property in order to make their profits.
From the Robber Barons to the global corporations, there exists a century-long lineage of suspicion about corporate activities, although it is difficult to disentangle legitimate concern from wild
speculation. There are some well-known and documented cases in which it is obvious that corporations acted to cover up decisions and activities that
were both immoral and illegal. For example, in the
1970s the Ford company calculated that it was
cheaper to pay compensation to relatives and victims of its badly designed Pinto model than to pay
for a major redesign of the car’s electrical system
(Punch, 23). On the other hand, there are examples
of lobbying that is legitimate, yet suspicious.
George W. Bush’s decision to pull out of the global
warming agreements in 2001 was almost certainly
related to the fact that his campaign had been substantially financed by fossil-fuel corporations. There
are also examples of corporations doing business
with highly oppressive governments, or even assisting with intervention in political matters. In any
case, the divide between legality and illegality is unclear and possibly unhelpful. If it is accepted that
corporations are silently taking over the functions of
democratic states, then perhaps legal distinctions
are themselves compromised by hegemonic understandings of the proper role of business.
206

In some senses, these are matters of representation and trust. The widespread acceptance of conspiracy tales about corporations simply reflects the
fact that big business is not widely trusted. It is
assumed that senior decision-makers in business
are motivated by money and career considerations,
so any story that involves the suggestion of dirty
dealing is treated as possible, if not probable. The
image of a shark in a suit sitting at the top of his
skyscraper is a powerful one in many contemporary films and novels. In some sense, these “masters of the universe” do live in a different world to
the majority of the world’s population. As A. Starr
puts it, everybody knows there is a conspiracy, and
understands the self-interest of the conspiracists,
but what galls is the level of deceit about such matters (Starr, 8). Hence the shadowy activities of
groups such as the Council on Foreign Relations,
Bilderbergers, U.S. Business Roundtable, Trilateral Commission, World Economic Forum, Conférence de Montréal, and Transatlantic Business
Dialogue are themselves treated as a self-evident
threat. Rather excitingly, “they” are organizing
against “us,” so exposing the conspiracy becomes a
kind of moral crusade in itself (Smith). It is a small
step from these “facts” to suggesting that “they”
are also responsible for concealing the secret of the
everlasting lightbulb, or sponsoring the assassinations of politicians who are hostile to their interests. Or indeed, that corporate domination reflects
the interests of a cabal of rich Jews or Masons who
are silently organizing a new world order (Spark).
In a real sense, corporations are conspiratorial.
The questions that remain concern the content of
the conspiracies, and whether the citizens of democratic states should regard these as legitimate
business practices or dangerously antidemocratic
symptoms of corporate rule.
Martin Parker
See also: Bilderbergers; Council on Foreign
Relations; Trilateral Commission.
References
Barnet, R., and J. Cavanagh. 1994. Global Dreams:
Imperial Corporations and the New World Order.
New York: Touchstone.

Coughlin, Father Charles

Barnet, R., and R. Müller. 1974. Global Reach: The
Power of the Multinational Corporations. New
York: Simon and Schuster.
Beder, S. 2000. Selling the Work Ethic: From
Puritan Pulpit to Corporate PR. London: Zed
Books.
Bierce, Ambrose. [1911] 1996. The Devil’s
Dictionary. Ware, England: Wordsworth Editions.
Chomsky, Noam. 1996. Powers and Prospects.
London: Pluto.
Frank, T. 2000. One Market under God. London:
Secker and Warburg.
Hirschman, A. 1996. “Rival Interpretations of
Market Society.” Pp. 250–259 in Business and
Society, ed. B. Castro. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Klein, Naomi. 2000. No Logo: Taking Aim at the
Brand Bullies. London: Flamingo.
Korten, D. 1995. When Corporations Rule the
World. West Hartford, CT: Kumarian Press.
Marcuse, H. 1964. One Dimensional Man. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Monbiot, G. 2000. Captive State: The Corporate
Takeover of Britain. London: Macmillan.
Parker, M. 2002. Against Management. Cambridge:
Polity.
Punch, M. 1996. Dirty Business. London: Sage.
Smith, W. 2001. “Conspiracy, Corporate Culture and
Criticism.” Pp. 153–165 in The Age of Anxiety:
Conspiracy Theory and the Human Sciences, ed.
J. Parish and J. Parker. Oxford: Blackwell.
Spark, A. 2001. “Conjuring Order: The New World
Order and Conspiracy Theories of Globalisation.”
Pp. 46–62 in The Age of Anxiety: Conspiracy
Theory and the Human Sciences, ed. J. Parish and
J. Parker. Oxford: Blackwell.
Starr, A. 2000. Naming the Enemy: Anti-Corporate
Movements Confront Globalisation. London: Zed
Books.
Whyte, W. H. 1961. The Organisation Man.
Harmondsworth, England: Penguin.

Coughlin, Father Charles
Charles E. Coughlin (1891–1979), a Catholic priest
and extraordinarily popular radio personality, contributed significantly to nationalist antisemitism in
the United States before World War II. Coughlin
asserted that covert Jewish economic interests had
led directly to the Great Depression, Franklin D.
Roosevelt’s presidency, and World War II. Coughlin

believed the same forces were responsible for later
silencing him. Coughlin’s use of the radio in these
accusations has won him notoriety as the inventor of
“hate radio” (Warren). Coughlin’s use of radio broadcast his antisemitism to an audience far broader than
enjoyed by earlier demagogues. Long after his popularity passed, Coughlin’s theories about the “international Jewish banking conspiracy” continued to thrive
among U.S. right-wing movements.
Charles Edward was born in Hamilton, Ontario,
on 22 October 1891, an only child to devoutly
Catholic parents. The church and his mother dominated young Charles’s life. Ordained in 1916,
Coughlin joined the Basilian religious order and
performed standard clerical duties in Catholic
parishes in southern Ontario. In 1923 Coughlin left
the Basilians and moved to suburban Detroit.
Radio Career and Politics
In 1926 Coughlin received an appointment to a
lackluster parish in Royal Oak, Michigan, a small
suburb north of Detroit. The parish suffered from
low membership, inadequate facilities, and Ku Klux
Klan harassment. Through the help of a parishioner, Coughlin began The Little Flower radio program (named after the parish’s patron saint, St.
Therese of Liesieux) to raise funds. Coughlin’s
histrionic speaking abilities quickly generated interest, and the show expanded in radio markets around
the Midwest. Within a year Coughlin broadcast his
shows nationwide.
Coughlin’s early broadcasts featured an ironic
spirit. As his popularity grew, Coughlin began
exploring the roots of social ills such as anti-Catholic
bigotry. Mail streamed into the Royal Oak parish,
causing Coughlin to hire additional secretaries to
manage it. During the Great Depression economic
issues appeared in each weekly broadcast. Coughlin
excoriated business interests for bleeding the working class of its of savings and his popularity consequently soared. The United States was a Christian
nation, Coughlin claimed, and Americans had certain rights granted by God and the Constitution,
such as personal autonomy, private property, and the
right to work. Anything threatening these rights was
not only unpatriotic but also quite demonic. In the
207

The Hippodrome furnished the stage for this demonstration on 29 October 1936, when Father Charles E. Coughlin, a
Detroit radio priest, addressed 6,000 adherents to his National Union for Social Justice. He is shown speaking at the
podium. (Bettmann/Corbis)

208

Coughlin, Father Charles

early 1930s Coughlin created Social Justice, a publication containing his broadcasts and other articles
sympathetic to Catholic social reform, to further
spread his message (Brinkley; Warren).
During the 1932 election Coughlin proclaimed
Franklin D. Roosevelt was the only candidate possessing the skills needed to resuscitate the nation.
Coughlin fancied himself as one of FDR’s field
representatives. The more Coughlin pushed for a
federal administrative role, though, the more the
Roosevelt administration rebuffed him. During
1934, Coughlin’s broadcasts shifted quickly from
praising to critizing Roosevelt and the New Deal.
Coughlin claimed that Roosevelt’s big business
connections threatened the very roots of representative democracy. By encouraging his radio audience to write congressional members, Coughlin
secured the defeat of Roosevelt’s 1935 attempt to
join the World Court as well as the 1938 federal
reorganization bill.
Gerald L. K. Smith, an evangelical minister and
one of Huey Long’s organizers in Lousiana, convinced Coughlin to unite his immense radio following and populist program with Francis
Townsend’s nationwide pension project for elderly
Americans. Coughlin and Smith created the
National Union Party (NUP) to organize their supporters into a third political party. Speculation suggested that the NUP possessed ample ability to
challenge the Roosevelt juggernaut in 1936. As a
priest, Coughlin could not run for office, so he and
Smith chose North Dakota congressman William
Lemke instead. However, support quickly eroded,
Roosevelt swept to victory, and Coughlin and
Smith parted ways acrimoniously (Jeansonne; Warren). The National Union for Social Justice, which
Coughlin had founded in 1934, continued to pursue a Catholic approach to the nation’s social and
economic reform. Coughlin maintained singular
control over the National Union’s agenda so that it
expressed thoroughly Catholic interpretations of
populist solutions.
Antisemitism and Catholicism
U.S. Catholicism’s unreconciled message of U.S.
materialism and suffering Christianity hastened

Coughlin’s descent to join Smith in antisemitic
demagoguery. Coughlin praised Adolf Hitler’s Nazi
regime for its success in limiting Jewish influence
on German national interests. Although his popularity shrank during the late 1930s, even after Germany’s Kristallnacht Coughlin still enjoyed millions
of supporters. Much of Coughlin’s popular support
came from Catholics who felt the priest was their
only advocate within the church. He was the one
priest willing to criticize the bishops for their extragavant lifestyles (Fisher, 78–80).
Coughlin’s Irish heritage provided the intellectual
framework for his antisemitism. The writings of
Dennis Fahey, a priest who taught Catholic philosophy and social thought in Dublin, blamed social and
economic upheavals on Jewish conspiracy. Besides
killing Jesus Christ, Fahey argued, Jews were responsible for the Protestant Reformation, the
French Revolution, industrialization’s social problems, and the League of Nations (Athans). Coughlin
quickly incorporated Fahey’s antisemitism into his
radio broadcasts and Social Justice articles, as the
National Union Party suffered its embarrassing election defeat. In 1938 the magazine reprinted Protocols of the Elders of Zion. When cautioned about its
authenticity, Coughlin merely claimed that the document, forgery or not, accurately predicted global
events. His radio broadcasts continued to draw connections between the Depression in the United
States, armed conflict in Europe, and international
Jewish finance.
Coughlin was rumored to have several economic
and political contacts with Nazi figures in the
United States and Germany. As the United States
entered World War II, Coughlin insisted that Jews
had started the conflict to advance their own
agenda. As federal authorities and Coughlin’s own
clerical superiors moved to silence him, the priest
alternated between expressions of militant defiance and meek acquiescence. Coughlin believed
that he was the victim of covert forces committed
to his destruction. Christ had thrown moneylenders out of the Temple, and consequently had
been crucified; Coughlin portrayed his silencing
along similar lines. Coughlin’s remaining audience,
composed mostly of German and Irish Catholics in
209

Council on Foreign Relations

the urban Northeast, only strengthened its resolve
to support the priest (Fisher, 77–78, 186, 236–7).
Silencing and End of Career
Coughlin’s popularity and unrelenting antisemitism caused consternation among the church’s
authorities. Catholics had faced significant antiCatholic animosity as recently as the 1920s, which
Coughlin’s early broadcasts noticeably diminished.
As Coughlin focused more on politics and antisemitism, church leaders sought to distinguish official teachings from Coughlin’s personal position.
However, Detroit’s Catholic bishop, Michael Gallagher, deflected much of the criticism. After Gallagher’s death in 1937, Detroit’s new bishop,
Edward Mooney, sought repeatedly to silence
Coughlin, forcing his radio program off the air in
1940. Members of Christian Front, a nationwide
organization Coughlin founded for young Catholic
men, were arrested for antigovernment conspiracies and gang violence in Jewish neighborhoods. In 1942 Social Justice ceased publication,
and Mooney prohibited Coughlin from speaking or
writing on any political matter. Coughlin returned
to suburban Detroit’s anonymity. While he deflected allegations of racism during the 1960s,
Coughlin has since been noted as an early precursor to white separatist movements and Holocaust
revisionism (Kaplan, 67–71; Warren, 5–6). His
violence-tinged antisemitic rhetoric concerning the
international Jewish conspiracy helps explain the
connection. Coughlin died in Royal Oak, Michigan,
on 27 October 1979.
Jeffrey Marlett
See also: Antisemitism.
References
Athans, Mary Christine. 1991. The Coughlin-Fahey
Connection: Father Charles E. Coughlin, Father
Denis Fahey, C.S.Sp., and Religious AntiSemitism in the United States, 1938–1954. New
York: Peter Lang.
Brinkley, Allen. 1983. Voices of Protest: Huey Long,
Charles Coughlin, and the Great Depression.
New York: Alfred Knopf.
Carpenter, Ronald H. 1998. Father Charles
Coughlin: Surrogate Spokesmen for the
Disaffected. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

210

Fisher, James T. 1989. The Catholic Counterculture
in America, 1933–1962. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press.
Jeansonne, Glen. 1988. Gerald L. K. Smith: Minister
of Hate. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Kaplan, Jeffrey, ed. 2000. Encyclopedia of White
Power. Rowan and Littlefield, Alta Mira Press.
Warren, Donald. 1996. Radio Priest: Father Charles
Coughlin, the Father of Hate Radio. The Free
Press.

Council on Foreign Relations
Founded at the close of World War I, the Council
on Foreign Relations (CFR) is an influential organization devoted to the study of foreign policy. Ever
since 1952, when Emmanuel Josephson’s Rockefeller Internationalist: The Man Who Misrules the
World proclaimed the CFR’s New York office to be
nothing less than the center and symbol of the sinister “Rockefeller–Soviet Axis,” right-wing opponents of the group—the John Birch Society (JBS) in
particular—have viewed the CFR as a conspiratorial cabal with designs on global power. Although the
fall of the Iron Curtain necessitated modification to
the theory of a CFR-Communist conspiracy, the
JBS still argues that the Council is really a group of
“establishment Insiders” intent on creating a socialist “One World Government.” CFR members are
well positioned for this coup, as they can be found
in the highest positions of the government (Henry
Kissinger, George Bush, and Bill Clinton); finance
(the Rockefellers and innumerable New York
bankers); the legal world (Supreme Court Justices
O’Connor, Ginsburg, and Breyer); and the media
(editors of the New York Times and network news
anchors); not to mention in other secret cabals such
as the Trilateral Commission and the Bohemian
Grove group. According to the conspiracy theorists,
contemporary political developments such as the
liberalization of global trade (e.g., NAFTA, GATT)
and the rise of the United Nations are the first steps
toward the CFR’s ultimate goals: the end of national
sovereignty and the enslavement of the entire world
under the banner of their centralized, all-powerful
“world government.” In this “New World Order,”
U.S. military forces will be employed as oppressive

Council on Foreign Relations

agents of the global supergovernment—UN
“peace-keeping” missions are merely the tip of this
iceberg.
To be fair, there are a great many “charges” that
members of the CFR would not care to dispute, but
the Council’s outlook on the New World Order is
radically different from that of the JBS because of
the historical context out of which the whole idea
developed. When the CFR was founded in 1919,
Woodrow Wilson’s quest for a utopian international
community constituted the starting point for many
CFR members’ views on U.S. foreign policy. If
World War I was to be the “war to end all wars,” it
was essential to produce a new international community that could ease the tensions between nationstates before serious conflicts erupted. What was
needed, argued the Wilsonians, was less jingoistic
nationalism and more international cooperation; a
movement toward creating “One World” from the
divided, fractured world of 1919 (and, indeed, since
this was prior to the rabid anticommunism of the
cold war, some members thought in terms of a
“socialist” world order, which was to become
immensely unpopular three decades on). Of course,
for a variety of reasons, lack of full U.S. participation
being one, the League of Nations never fulfilled this
role, and within a decade Europe was quickly
descending into another era of bloodshed. The
Council’s investigations into the causes of World
War II only reinforced the Wilsonian ideals of many
members. The division of the world’s great powers
combined with rampant nationalism had produced
the preconditions for fascism, genocide, and the
near total destruction of Europe. Supporters of the
CFR today would argue that the Council’s advocacy
for a New World Order must be understood in this
context, and that the movement toward international cooperation under the aegis of the United
Nations heralds an era of increasing peace and prosperity rather than an Orwellian nightmare. “Mainstream” critics and historians of the CFR like Robert
Schulzinger (who actually suggests that much of the
Council’s work is cliché-ridden and ineffectual)
argue that the Council’s ideas merely mirror the
transformations brought on by globalization, and
that to read the similarity between the CFR’s ideas

and global developments as involving a causal link is
simply a mistake.
Thus, as far as the New World Order goes, it
seems as though one man’s secular utopia is
another man’s apocalypse; the division between the
two perspectives is completely unbridgeable, and
the apocalyptic side of the divide is inevitably dismissed by mainstream culture as “extreme.” The
charge of elitism, however—the claim that the
CFR is a network of “insiders” that form an allpowerful East Coast “establishment”—is less easily
dispelled, since the CFR is quite self-consciously
elitist. The CFR argues that international relations
should be studied by serious, dispassionate minds
free from the taint of impurities such as nationalism. At the outset of the cold war, for instance,
George Kennan published his now infamous “X”
article in the CFR’s journal, Foreign Affairs, and
raised so much public hysteria surrounding the
Soviet menace that the Council began to fear that
the issue of U.S-Soviet relations would be hijacked
by demagogues (and, in view of what loomed on
the horizon in McCarthyism, perhaps this fear was
not misplaced). If the CFR is “secretive,” argue its
proponents, it is because sometimes heightened
public consciousness actually works against the
proper ends of international politics. Even mainstream academics, however—people who would
themselves no doubt be designated “insiders” by
the JBS—might well argue that while the CFR’s
cultivation of its status as an elite organization may
not accurately be termed conspiratorial, it is not at
all clear that it represents a positive development
in U.S. political culture.
Marlon Kuzmick
See also: Anticommunism; Bush, George; Cold
War; John Birch Society; Kissinger, Henry; New
World Order; One-World Government; Trilateral
Commission.
References
Josephson, Emanuel. 1952. Rockefeller
Internationalist: The Man Who Misrules the
World. New York: Chedney Press.
McManus, John F. 1994. “Americans Have a Right
to Know about the Council on Foreign
Relations.” http://www.jbs.org/focus/conspiracy/
righttoknow_cfr.htm.

211

Covert Action Quarterly

Perloff, James. 1989. Shadows of Power: The
Council on Foreign Relations and the American
Decline. Boston, MA: Western Islands.
Schulzinger, Robert D. 1984. The Wise Men of
Foreign Affairs: The History of the Council on
Foreign Relations. New York: Columbia
University Press.

Covert Action Quarterly
The Washington, D.C.–based magazine Covert
Action Quarterly (CAQ) began publishing in 1978
under the title of Covert Action Information Bulletin (CAIB). The magazine has developed a following not as a conspiracy-theory-related publication, but as a source for reliable, consistent, and
accurate investigative reporting. Originally, CAQ
was a watchdog journal that focused on the abuses
and activities of the CIA, yet it has gradually
evolved into a more general, progressive investigative magazine. While almost every issue of CAIB
focused on the CIA, detailing its activities in Central America and Southeast Asia, in the domestic
media, and on university campuses, CAQ has covered a wider range of domestic and international
political issues with stories and occasionally entire
issues on surveillance technologies, the U.S. prison
system, the environment, mad cow disease, AIDS,
ECHELON, Bill Clinton, media cover-ups, Iraqi
sanctions, and the drug war. Contributing authors
have included intellectuals, writers, and activists
such as Noam Chomsky, Howard Zinn, Michael
Parenti, Sara Flounders, Philip Agee, John Pilger,
Ramsey Clark, Leonard Peltier, Allen Ginsberg,
Diana Johnstone, Laura Flanders, Edward S. Herman, and Ward Churchill.
CAQ was cofounded and copublished by Ellen
Ray, William Schaap, and Louis Wolf, along with
former CIA agents such as James and Elsie
Wilcott, and Philip Agee, author of Inside the Company: CIA Diary. Following in the tradition of
CounterSpy Magazine (1973–1984), with whom
CAQ’s publishers originally worked, highlights of
CAIB included the notorious “Naming Names”
column, which printed the names of CIA officers
under diplomatic cover. These were tracked

212

through exhaustive research in the State Department Biographic Register and various domestic
and international diplomatic lists. This column, and
others like it, came to an end in 1982 when the
Intelligence Identities Protection Act was signed
into law by Ronald Reagan. CAIB had to end the
“Naming Names” column, but more significantly,
the act required that magazines such as CAQ be
more wary about the names they published within
the articles of their contributors. This was particularly significant after December 1975 when
Richard S. Welch, a CIA station chief, was assassinated in Athens, Greece. CounterSpy was criticized by both the CIA and the press for its exposure of the agent’s name.
In 1992, Issue 43, Covert Action Information Bulletin changed its name to the current Covert Action
Quarterly (“Recommended by Noam Chomsky; targeted by the CIA”), a 64–70-page magazine published four times a year. CAQ had a reputation for
beating to the punch more mainstream standardbearers, such as the New York Times. In 1995, it covered the genocide in Rwanda and U.S. complicity in
those events, years before any other publication
cared to notice; it ran in-depth investigative articles
on the rise of homegrown militias before the Oklahoma bombing; and it was the first U.S. publication
to reveal the existence of ECHELON (the security
agencies’ surveillance software). CAQ has been the
regular recipient of the annual Project Censored
awards for the Top 25 Censored Stories. The magazine has often had several articles on the list, such as
in 1997 with Karl Grossman’s “Risking the World:
Nuclear Proliferation in Space,” John Stauber and
Sheldon Rampton’s “The Public Relations Industry’s
Secret War on Activists,” and David Burnham’s
“White-Collar Crime: Whitewash at the Justice
Department.”
In 1998, CAQ’s staff (comprising its editor of
nine years, Terry Allen, associate editor Sanho Tree,
and staff member Barbara Neuwirth) were dismissed by mail and without notice in a manner that
seriously damaged the magazine’s reputation, particularly since the magazine was at its strongest during these years. The conduct of the publishers was

Crédit Mobilier Scandal

strongly criticized in newsgroups and on mailing
lists, in articles in the Washington City Paper and
the Village Voice, and by writers like Christopher
Hitchens and Alexander Cockburn, who called the
publishers “So-called leftists act[ing] like people
from the Fortune 500” (Ripley, 12). While the management suggested that the firings were due to
interpersonal issues, editors Allen and Tree disagreed, claiming that the differences cut along
political and editorial lines. In a widely distributed
letter, Allen asserted that the publishers unsuccessfully attempted to have its editors publish articles
that presented the Serbs as blameless victims of
genocide and that denied the existence of concentration camps under Milosevic, and one that professed to expose Hitler’s secret bunker in Antarctica. The publishers also took issue with an article
that affectionately described Fidel Castro as a “nice
old fart.” They also attempted to print articles that
dealt with issues in a more conspiratorial fashion,
thus playing out the traditional tension between
conspiracy theory and the investigative reporting of
governmental and corporate malfeasance.
Following a 2001 lawsuit between the publishers,
the magazine’s electronic and print rights were split
between its publishers, yet both the paper and online
versions (www.covertactionquarterly.org and www.
covertaction.org) have remained dormant since their
inception. Following the firings, CAQ lost both its
contributor base and its ability to organize itself,
eventually leading to the demise of the magazine.
Excluding an issue assembled by the publishers, and
another edited by Rory O’Neill (April–June 2001),
who was consequently fired by the publishers, CAQ
has not published regularly since the 1998 “purge.”
Tony Elias
See also: Central Ingelligence Agency; Pentagon
Papers.
References
Allen, Terry, Sanho Tree, and Louis Wolf. 1998.
Personal interviews, 14–15 June.
Covert Action Information Bulletin, Covert Action
Quarterly, and CounterSpy: http://www.pir.org.
Ripley, Amanda. 1998. “Fascist Lefties.” Washington
City Paper, May 22–28.

O’Neill, Rory. 2001. “Re: Encyclopedia Entry.”
Personal email, 3 December.

Crédit Mobilier Scandal
As with many other conspiracy theories, the Crédit
Mobilier scandal involved large sums of money
being controlled by “elites” or “special interests.”
The Crédit Mobilier company of the United States
originated as a construction company to help construct the Union Pacific Railroad. Oakes Ames,
Thomas C. Durant, and others formed the company in 1864 out of an existing Pennsylvania charter as the Pennsylvania Fiscal Agency. Ames and
other Union Pacific investors headed the new firm,
meaning that they could sell contracts from the
railroad to their own company.
Union Pacific bonds, which were to sell at $100
per share, in fact sold well below that. To cover the
costs of construction, Durant and Ames founded
Crédit Mobilier, in which the railroad would give
grossly inflated construction contracts to the company and Crédit Mobilier would use those contracts to purchase Union Pacific stock at par value.
Ames then resold the stock on the open market at
market prices, covering the difference with some
of the inflated construction costs. In 1867, for
example, Ames assigned contracts for the construction of nearly 670 miles of railroad that brought the
Crédit Mobilier owners between $7 and $23 million and left the railroad in financial trouble.
Ames ensured the acquiescence of Congress by
bribing the members through stock offers: Ames
(who was also a U.S. congressman) sold shares of
the railroad at a discount to other lawmakers, even
allowing them to purchase the stock on credit, paying for the stock out of the dividends earned by the
securities. Sending a list of names to receive stock
to an associate, Ames made certain to enlist the
services of Representatives Schuyler Colfax and
James A. Garfield and Senator James W. Patterson,
although Ames’s list soon found its way into
Charles Dana’s newspaper, the New York Sun.
Publication of the “preferred customer” list set off
a firestorm in 1872—an election year.

213

Cronenberg, David

Congress undertook an investigation of the company. Already, allegations circulated about President Ulysses Grant’s involvement in the “Gold Corner” of 1869 (an attempt by speculators to “corner”
the market in gold and thus manipulate prices),
while the Reconstruction governments being
established in the South were gaining a reputation
for graft. Bribing public officials to build railroads,
or to benefit from existing routes, was nothing new.
For two decades, Cornelius Vanderbilt had battled
Jay Gould, Daniel Drew, and Jim Fisk over several
railroads, especially the New York Harlem Railroad. But, as one contemporary writer observed
about Crédit Mobilier, “there was a film of decency
thrown over the transaction by Mr. Ames,” and
many members of Congress willingly accepted the
shares.
Famous railroader Collis P. Huntington of the
Central Pacific Railroad—the other end of the
transcontinental—and other important “captains of
industry” were called to testify before Congress
about construction costs. Although Congress
issued a pair of reports, which tarnished the reputations of Colfax, Patterson, and Rep. James
Brooks of New York, as well as Ames, only Brooks
and Ames were censured, and no one was prosecuted. Brooks, ironically, had only received his
position as a government director on the railroad
after he, as a former Whig, had come out in opposition to the impeachment of the Democratic president, Andrew Johnson. Since the Crédit Mobilier
scandal occurred on Grant’s watch, and was followed by the “Whiskey Ring” (the resignation of
Grant’s secretary of war for accepting kickbacks),
the “salary grab,” and other scandals, the episode
damaged Grant’s public image. Crédit Mobilier
also made a permanent enemy of cartoonist
Thomas Nast, who lost $329 in the scandal, and
who supported the Democratic Party after that.
A larger problem stemmed from the federal
funding of the railroads through the subsidy system,
which encouraged graft and corruption. The government gave land grants to transcontinental railroads to sell as a means to raise construction cash.
However, the grants were based on miles of rail
laid, ensuring that both the Union and Central
214

Pacific Railroads would lay far more track than
needed to link them together. Indeed, at times, the
railroads built away from each other, delaying the
connection in order to continue receiving funds.
This stood in stark contrast to James J. Hill’s Great
Northern Railroad, which received no federal subsidies, and which did not suffer financially in the
panic of 1873. More than the delays in building the
Union and Central Pacific Railroads; more than the
circuitous routes they used; and more than their
ultimate financial distress caused by their original
privileged subsidized positions, the Crédit Mobilier
scandal revealed the dangers of linking large-scale
business projects with the government, outside the
control of the market and the discipline of prices.
For the conspiracy-minded, however, the
bribery of public officials dovetailed with the influence of such shadowy forces as the Bank of
England or the Masons. Crédit Mobilier also implicated Grant, weakening his presidency. Coming on
the heels of the infamous “Tweed Ring” (the network of political and financial corruption in New
York City presided over by William Tweed from
the 1860s), Crédit Mobilier convinced many that
government was corrupt at every level.
Larry Schweikart
References
Crawford, Jay Boyd. 1880. The Crédit Mobilier of
America; Its Origin and History, Its Work of
Constructing the Union Pacific Railroad and the
Relation of Members of Congress Therewith.
Boston, MA: C. W. Culkins.
Martin, Edward Winslow [pseud.]. 1873. Behind the
Scenes in Washington. New York: Continental
Publishing Company.
Paulet, Elizabeth. 1999. The Role of Banks in
Monitoring Firms: The Case of the Crédit
Mobilier. London: Routledge.
Trent, Logan Douglas. 1981. The Crédit Mobilier.
New York: Arno Press.

Cronenberg, David
David Cronenberg is a Canadian film director
whose work features horror and science-fiction
narratives in which characters find themselves
transformed by some viral, technological, or phar-

Cronenberg, David

maceutical agent. Such “mutations” are frequently
caused by conspiratorial corporations and produce
paranoid psychological states and violent outcomes. Cronenberg’s unnerving films have
explored the ways in which biological horror and
pleasure intermix by portraying transformations
that are both sexually charged and pathological.
Born in Toronto, Canada, on 15 March 1943,
Cronenberg has had a career mostly spent in
Canada. While attending the University of Toronto
as an English student, Cronenberg made two short
films, Transfer (1966) and From the Drain (1967).
He also began two short features, Stereo (1969) and
Crimes of the Future (1970), in which his distinctive
sensibility began to emerge. The subjects that were
explored in these films, such as medical and psychological experimentation, sexual ambiguity and metamorphosis, violence and torture, would recur and
find development in all his later work. The auteurist
nature of Cronenberg’s work—in which he tended
to fill the roles of writer, director, cinematographer,
and editor—was also already evident.
In 1975, Cronenberg’s first feature film, The
Parasite Murders (a.k.a., They Came from Within,
Shivers), was released. Shivers (as it is now generally known) tells the story of a doctor who produces
a parasite that transforms its hosts into sexobsessed psychotics. The film is set in a secluded
apartment complex that becomes the setting for
the eventual epidemic. Like Cronenberg’s Rabid
(1976), the outbreak of a virus and the ensuing
community-wide panic drive the plot of the film.
While this reiterates the familiar social paranoia
that informed historical events such as the witchhunts of Salem or even the McCarthy period, these
plots focus more particularly upon the personal
transformation of individuals into some new stage
of being, or what is referred to in Videodrome as
the “New Flesh.” These scenarios are often represented with ambivalence, in which characters both
welcome and abhor the venereal transformations
wreaked upon their bodies. The recurring subject
of what Cronenberg has called “creative cancers”
(Rodley, 80) has been reinterpreted and remade
throughout his films, particularly because this
“takeover” of his characters’ identities is never sim-

ply the result of an external agent (though this is
often the catalyst) but a result of their bodies turning against themselves.
Scanners (1981) tells the story of Cameron Vale,
a homeless man with telepathic and telekinetic
psychic powers. He is recruited by a recently
attacked corporation with its own Scanner program
to infiltrate a Scanner conspiracy with plans for
global conquest. The scanners are a product of a
mass-marketed pharmaceutical (“ephemerol”)
developed by the scientist who recruited Vale, and
the conspiracy they are fighting is producing a new
generation of “Scanner soldiers.” The play of conspiracy and counterconspiracy in Scanners, which
recurs throughout Cronenberg’s films, presents an
ethically uncertain universe in which no side is
entirely good or evil, and where characters are usually implicated in, if not responsible for, their own
destruction.
Recognized by most critics as Cronenberg’s masterpiece, Videodrome (1983) introduces us to Max
Renn, a cable television executive who discovers an
obscure cable transmission of sadomasochistic
films. In his quest to purchase the snufflike offerings of the Videodrome channel, Renn falls victim
to the subliminal content embedded in the films,
losing his ability to distinguish reality from fantasy.
Eventually, he discovers that he has been the
unsuspecting guinea pig in a right-wing plot to take
over a sexually depraved North America through
these transmissions. As with many of Cronenberg’s
films, Videodrome uses an unreliable protagonist
whose perspective becomes progressively more
delusional. Without the aid of an omniscient perspective, the audience is left to navigate between
the paranoid vision of the protagonist and the supposed “reality” of the conspiracy that affects it. The
Borgesian reality-games of Videodrome repeat
themselves in eXistenZ (1999), which uses the
future of virtual reality gaming as its premise for a
world of shifting realities. Both films espouse similar theories regarding the media and the manner in
which it has become a part of the human nervous
system, affecting and transforming reality.
Cronenberg’s direction of The Dead Zone (1983),
based on the novel by Stephen King, is the most
215

Cuban Missile Crisis

explicitly “political” of his conspiracy narratives as
well as one of the few successful adaptations of
Stephen King’s work. Based on material other than
his own, The Dead Zone was not immediately identifiable as a Cronenberg film since it is particularly
unmarked by his usual filmic obsessions. It is in
some ways a “classic” conspiracy tale, dealing with a
psychic character who becomes an assassin in order
to prevent the election of a presidential candidate
he believes will one day start a nuclear war.
The strong influence of William S. Burroughs on
Cronenberg’s films—apparent in their shared fascination with conspiracy, biological mutation, and
parasitism—led to his direction of Naked Lunch
(1991). Though the film did not attempt to present
the reputedly unfilmable novel by Burroughs, it
based itself in the mythology of Burroughs’s work
and the biographic details of his life, amalgamating
the worlds of New York junkies, pest controllers,
and Beat writers, with that of American expatriates
and conspiratorial plots in Tangier. While Cronenberg has authored the screenplays for most of his
films, his interest in the work of underground writers led to his direction of a film version of J. G. Ballard’s Crash (1996), for which he won the Jury
prize at the Cannes Film Festival.
Because the majority of Cronenberg’s films are
characterized by visceral depictions of the body
and rely on gruesome special effects, critical appreciation of Cronenberg’s work as something more
than exploitation cinema took some time. Though
Cronenberg’s work has never become a part of the
mainstream, the early criticism of his films as
exploitation has developed into a recognition of the
director as someone intimately concerned with
telling stories about the human body, disease, and
transformation.
Tony Elias
See also: Burroughs, William S.; Corporations;
Drugs; Paranoia.
References
Handling, Piers, ed. 1983. The Shape of Rage: The
Films of David Cronenberg. Don Mills, Ontario:
Academy of Canadian Cinema.
Rodley, Chris, ed. 1992. Cronenberg on Cronenberg.
London: Faber and Faber.

216

Cuban Missile Crisis
On 22 October 1962, President Kennedy made a
television address announcing a blockade of the
Communist island of Cuba. The broadcast followed
seven days of meetings held by the National Security
Council Executive Committee (ExComm), a group
of advisors specially convened by the president in
response to the discovery of Soviet missile bases
under construction in Cuba. The “quarantine” was
to prevent further equipment from reaching the
island and its announcement caused the Soviet premier, Nikita Khrushchev, to stop his ships. There
then followed an exchange of letters and secret
back-channel negotiations that resulted in a deal.
The missiles would be removed in exchange for a
public U.S. pledge of noninvasion; a secret second
part, involving the removal of U.S. Jupiter missiles in
Italy and Turkey, was only revealed later.
Few conspiracy theories regarding the crisis
itself have been given much credence by Western
historians. During the cold war, Russian writers
(e.g., Nechayev, 1987) argued that there had never
been any missiles in Cuba and that the CIA had
doctored photographs. However, glasnost and the
opening up of the Soviet archives provided plenty
of evidence that there were actually more missiles
on the island than the United States thought. It has
also been suggested that the peaceful resolution of
the crisis and the withdrawal of missiles from Italy
and Turkey were part of the reason for the assassination of President Kennedy. Elements within the
military and the CIA are said to have seen
Kennedy’s refusal to fight as a sign of weakness and
defeat. Coupled with the failure of the Bay of Pigs
invasion and the noninvasion pledge, Kennedy
greatly angered anti-Castro Cubans as well as businessmen whose assets in Cuba were nationalized.
Members of ExComm and Kennedy’s inner circle also took part in a conspiracy of silence and misinformation to protect the president and his
brother, Bobby, over the resolution of the crisis.
Aside from not revealing the deal to remove the
Jupiter missiles from Turkey and Italy, insiders also
distorted key events in the crisis to portray the
Kennedys more favorably. In particular, Kennedy
aide Theodore Sorenson secretly edited Bobby

Cuban Missile Crisis

Debate on the Cuban Missile Crisis at the United Nations on 25 October 1962. During the meeting, U.S. ambassador to
the United Nations Adlai Stevenson confronted Soviet ambassador Valerian Zorin about the presence of Soviet missiles
in Cuba. (Corel Corporation)

Kennedy’s posthumously published diary of the crisis, Thirteen Days, making it seem that Bobby had
led the anti–air strike faction in ExComm, and that
he and Sorenson had devised the solution that
solved the crisis. Key meetings with the Soviet
ambassador were also misrepresented. Similarly,
another aide waited thirty years before revealing
that the president had been prepared to ask the
secretary general of the UN to impose a peaceful
resolution.
Neil Denslow

See also: Anticommunism; Bay of Pigs Invasion;
Castro, Fidel; Cold War; Johnson, Lyndon B.;
Kennedy, John F., Assassination of.
References
Hersh, Seymour. 1998. The Dark Side of Camelot.
London: HarperCollins.
Nechayev, I. V. 1987. Po stupenyam yadernogo
bezumiya (Through the Stages of Nuclear
Insanity). Moscow:
White, Mark J. Missiles in Cuba: Kennedy,
Khrushchev, Castro, and the 1962 Crisis.
Chicago, IL: Ivan R. Dee.

217

D
DeLillo, Don
Don DeLillo, the distinguished contemporary U.S.
novelist, is the author of thirteen novels—including
Amazons (1980), a pseudonymously penned novel
by Cleo Birdwell—and two plays. His many awards
include the National Book Award for White Noise
(1985), the PEN/Faulkner award for Mao II (1991),
and in 2000, the William Dean Howells Medal for
Underworld (1997). DeLillo is also the first American to receive the Jerusalem Prize (1999) in recognition of his complete works that, in the words of
the prize committee, “express the theme of the
freedom of the individual in society” (Time).
DeLillo’s novels are prescient critiques of U.S.
culture, engaging specifically U.S. subjects like cultural materialism, sports hysteria, rock music, terror
and violence, conspiracies, waste, post–World War
II U.S. history, corporate America, and the assassination of John F. Kennedy. DeLillo’s works are
prophetic as they apprehend and explore latent U.S.
ills before they achieve privileged status in the
media. DeLillo understands that many U.S. predilections are connected as Underworld claims:
“everything is connected in the end” (826). For his
acute perceptions DeLillo has been dismissed by
the New York Times Review of Books as the “chief
shaman of the paranoid school of American fiction”
(Begley, 303), and detractors criticize him for his
tenacious exhuming of Americana and for creating
what Bruce Bawer calls, “conspiracy-happy protagonists” (35). Speaking with Anthony DeCurtis on the
Zapruder film, DeLillo remarked that “the strongest

feeling I took away from that moment is the feeling
that the shot came from the front and not from the
rear” (291). From this comment, and its implication
of an alternative to the Warren Commission’s findings, critics immediately branded him as a conspiracy theorist writing fiction. It is not surprising that
DeLillo’s artistic integrity has invited such criticism.
DeLillo’s work is perhaps better understood as daring, exploring the underside or undercurrent of U.S.
history and culture. DeLillo’s significance emerges
from his willingness to explore alternatives to the
mainstream consensus and to address the unaccountability of the many, intricate connections—
cosmic, quotidian, and profound—of chance and
coincidence in modern and contemporary America.
Much of DeLillo’s writing underscores what he
calls in his first novel, Americana (1971), the “true
power of the image” (12), particularly media
images. For DeLillo, no image is more penetrating
and culture-altering than frame 313 of the
Zapruder film, the frame capturing the precise
moment of Kennedy’s assassination. The assassination is so pervasive in U.S. culture and so significant for DeLillo that he has asserted in an interview with Adam Begley that U.S. history seems
“engineered” since then (303), and that it even
“invented” him as a writer (DeCurtis, 285). This is
not to say that DeLillo views history as necessarily
controlled as part of a massive military-industrial
conspiracy, but that he has charted a collective shift
in U.S. consciousness since 22 November 1963.
Moreover, a corollary of DeLillo’s works is that
219

Democratic-Republican Societies

they call for a more critical appraisal of our cultural
media images by pointing to and critiquing prominent images, like the famous picture of Lee Harvey
Oswald holding a Manilicher rifle and purportedly
Communist journals. It has been alleged that the
photo was adulterated with Oswald’s head inserted
afterward.
DeLillo has found resonance and connectivity in
parallel U.S. events since JFK. He has further tailored his fiction for, and written perspicacious
essays on, seemingly disparate events like Oswald’s
death (Libra), shot simultaneously by television
cameras and Jack Ruby’s pistol, and the Ronald
Reagan assassination attempt with, as he writes in
“American Blood,” its “choreography of gesture” of
Secret Service agents flourishing drawn weapons
(24). DeLillo here shrewdly notes that Americans
are so culturally steeped in the lore of JFK’s assassination that even Reagan’s agents displayed a palpably self-conscious awareness of the gravity of their
videotaped moment as the drama unfolded, and
that event’s historical antecedence in JFK’s assassination. In an age of ubiquitous video cameras and
amateur-video footage, DeLillo contends that it is
no longer possible to live without an urgent selfconscious awareness, even during the mundane
happenings of common existence. For DeLillo, the
United States unalterably changed in 5.6 seconds at
Dallas’s Dealey Plaza. Connecting subsequent
events with the Kennedy assassination is not paranoid, as DeLillo’s detractors have claimed. Rather,
it demonstrates a circumspect understanding of the
power of U.S. media images, and how no event
after JFK can be performed without reference to
the assassination on some level.
His work often returns to doublings and mirrored events. In Libra, Oswald and Kennedy’s lives
are linked; DeLillo himself claims an affinity for
Oswald, noting that they lived close to each other
as children in the Bronx. The basis for DeLillo’s
largest and perhaps most complex novel, Underworld, is the 4 October 1951 New York Times’ double headline of “Giants capture pennant” and
“Soviets explode atomic bomb.” The headlines’
interpenetrating “shot-heard-around-the-world”
resonance and synchronicity is just one of many
220

chance events of twentieth-century America that
engage DeLillo. For DeLillo, our age is increasingly technologically bounded, and while these
gains are beneficial they are also bewildering and
isolating. DeLillo’s fiction, then, operates as a
counter to U.S. existential loneliness and despair.
His fiction is a restorative by turning our collective
attention back to the ordinary elements of human
life, noting the sometimes alarming moments of
conjunction in disparate episodes. Finding these
instances of revelation and transcendence in seemingly typical junctures is a hallmark of his fiction.
Timothy Jacobs
See also: Kennedy, John F., Assassination of;
Oswald, Lee Harvey; Ruby, Jack; Warren
Commission.
References
Bawer, Bruce. 1985. “Don DeLillo’s America.” The
New Criterion, April, 34–42.
Begley, Adam. 1993. “The Art of Fiction CXXXV:
Interview with Don DeLillo.” Paris Review 35
(128): 275–305.
DeCurtis, Anthony. 1990. “‘An Outsider in This
Society’: An Interview with Don DeLillo.” The
South Atlantic Quarterly 89: 280–304.
DeLillo, Don. 1971. Americana. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
———. 1983. “American Blood.” Rolling Stone, 8
December, 21–28; 74.
Time. 1997. Underworld. New York: Scribner.
———. 1999, 5 July: http://www.jerusalembookfair.
com/default.html.

Democratic-Republican Societies
Democratic-Republican Societies were popular
associations that existed in the United States from
around 1793 to 1799. The impetus behind these
short-lived societies was a stated desire to guard
against the government conspiring against the people. In 1792, Philip Freneau, an early Republican
newspaper editor, summarized that defensive and
mistrusting sentiment in his National Gazette
when he spoke of the need for such societies “for
the purpose of watching over the rights of the people, and giving an early alarm in case of governmental encroachments thereupon.” Such groups
he considered “absolutely necessary in every coun-

Democratic-Republican Societies

try, where the people wish to preserve an uncorrupted legislation” (National Gazette, 25 July
1792). The Charleston Society stated their founding principle clearly: they had only “one general
purpose, that of watching narrowly public characters” to guard against encroachments on the rights
and liberties gained during the American Revolution. The Democratic Society of the City of New
York declared in its 1794 constitution “THAT all
legitimate power resides in the People” (Foner,
151). Societies, of which there were about fifty,
were formed in rural and urban settings, in all but
two states. Especially active and important groups
were formed in Maryland, New York, Pennsylvania, and South Carolina. Members, of which there
were thousands, were varied in their social status
and occupations, and were drawn from many ranks
of society, counting in their numbers artisans and
farmers, but also doctors and lawyers, and other
professionals. Members were also diverse in terms
of their religious and political affiliations, even
including some Federalists.
As U.S. political culture became increasingly polarized in the mid-1790s, Democratic-Republican
Societies were at the heart of debate about the
nature of the early American Republic. Members
toasted the French Revolution at their meetings,
waxed enthusiastically in newspaper articles published in the expanding press, and warmly greeted
Citizen Edmund Charles Genet, the French
ambassador, when he visited the United States in
1793. The societies also tended to be mistrusting of
the second Federalist administration of President
George Washington, which they thought aimed to
expand the powers of the national government,
especially the executive branch, and to encroach
upon the liberties of the common man. Many Federalists came to believe that the societies themselves were conspiring to overthrow the government, a theory that was often broadcast in
newspapers of the day like John Fenno’s Gazette of
the United States or from pulpits like that of David
Osgood of Medford, Massachusetts. Parallels were
drawn between the Democratic-Republican Societies and the Jacobin Clubs of the French Revolution. Charges against the Democratic Societies

became more pronounced and were leveled with
more conviction after the outbreak of the Whiskey
Rebellion in western Pennsylvania in 1794. Historians are not yet agreed on the exact role of the societies and their members in that insurrection. There
was a degree of overlap between society membership and the Whiskey Rebels, but a lack of solid evidence means the precise connections may never be
known with certainty. To many at the time, however, a lack of solid evidence did not seem to matter. Washington thought that blame for the insurrection lay squarely on the shoulders of the
societies. The rebellion, he wrote, was “the first formidable fruit of the Democratic Societies” (Allen,
593). In a famous statement, Washington spoke of
certain “self-created Societies” which had “spread
themselves over this country, have been laboring
incessantly to sow the seeds of distrust, jealousy,
and of course discontent; thereby hoping to effect
some revolution in the government” (Allen, 603).
Democratic-Republican Societies increasingly
came under criticism as being hotbeds of conspiracy, a view summarized by a critic in the Kentucky
Gazette when he described the Democratic Society
of Kentucky as a “horrible sink of treason,—that
hateful synagogue of anarchy,—that odious conclave of tumult,—that frightful cathedral of discord,—that poisonous garden of conspiracy,—that
hellish school of rebellion and opposition to all regular and well-balanced authority” (31 August
1793). By 1796 membership in most DemocraticRepublican Societies was waning and by 1800 they
had all but disappeared, although their spirit lived
on, in part, through the Republican Party they
helped bring to power.
Mark G. Spencer
See also: Genet, Citizen Edmond Charles; Whiskey
Rebellion.
References
Allen, W. B., ed. 1988. George Washington: A
Collection. Indianapolis, IN: LibertyClassics.
Foner, Philip S., ed. 1976. The DemocraticRepublican Societies, 1790–1800: A Documentary
Sourcebook of Constitutions, Declarations,
Addresses, Resolutions, and Toasts. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press.

221

Dick, Philip K.

Koschnik, Albrecht. 2001. “The Democratic
Societies of Philadelphia and the Limits of the
American Public Sphere, circa 1793–1795.”
William and Mary Quarterly, 3d ser., 58:
615–636.
Link, Eugene Perry. 1942. Democratic-Republican
Societies, 1790–1800. Morningside Heights, NY:
Columbia University Press.
Schoenbachler, Matthew. 1998. “Republicanism in
the Age of Democratic Revolution: The
Democratic-Republican Societies of the 1790s.”
Journal of the Early Republic 18: 237–261.

Dick, Philip K.
The speculative fiction of Philip K. Dick
(1928–1982) transformed the paranoid plots of
1930s–1950s pulp fiction about conspiratorial
threats from outside by infusing them with anxieties emerging in the 1960s–1970s regarding the
disintegration of psychological structures under
the pressure of postmodernity (the turning of every
last realm of public and private life into a commodity; disinformation produced by media elites;
the construction of a consensus reality through
manufactured illusion; technologies of behavior
modification). Dick’s most important books—Time
Out of Joint (1959), The Man in the High Castle
(1962), The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch
(1965), Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?
(1968), Ubik (1969), A Maze of Death (1970), A
Scanner Darkly (1977), The Divine Invasion
(1981), Valis (1981), The Transmigration of Timothy Archer (1982)—extrapolate the idea of revelation, the ideological nucleus of the conspiracy
genre, into something at once sublime, uncanny,
and insidious. The humdrum lives of his “little guy”
protagonists are totally disrupted as they discover
themselves implicated in “an intricate, sustained
illusion-system of massive proportion” (The Game
Players of Titan, 110). Nightmarish disclosures that
cannot be rationalized away to maintain the illusion
of free will, in combination with the suggestion that
the paranoid nightmares might be not fantasies but
glimpses of the vast underlying system of society,
incompletely comprehended, allow Dick’s conspiracy narratives to function simultaneously as case222

studies of paranoia and as allegorical critiques satirizing the totalitarian tendencies of postwar U.S.
capitalism. Rehearsing the various mechanisms
and detours of paranoia, Dick’s protagonists proceed to construct more and more elaborate
explanatory models in compensatory response to
profound feelings of personal insubstantiality and
social impotence.
Dick reconceived the common science fiction
device of the “pocket universe”—a discrete microcosmic enclave of incubated ignorance—as a virtual reality perpetrated by governmental or corporate media. He presciently depicted dystopian
near-future societies characterized by systems of
simulation that serve to control the population by
infiltrating consciousness and structuring the individual’s sense of self. Plots concerning the capture
of audiences and markets by oligarchic networks
render in fictional terms his recognition of how an
emerging society of the spectacle was beginning to
induce people to invest in hegemonic models of
the world that were against their best interests.
Dick’s deeply ambivalent work typically merges
the angst-ridden folklore of mind control (e.g., the
implantation of false memories) with the superficially more hopeful folklore of alternate realities
(e.g., via drug-enhanced psi powers). By blurring
the demarcation between “actual” events and psychic processes, and thereby surrendering cognitive
suppositions to endless permutation, Dick’s destabilizing narratives throw into question all criteria
for establishing credibility or future action. For
example, A Scanner Darkly depicts the gradual
blurring of demarcated role-identities as a police
undercover agent is required to surveil a drug
user/dealer he had been pretending to be, but in
fact has now become. Here the unimpeachable
founding premise, so dear to conspiracy theory, is
tinged for comic effect with digressive thought
processes typically conduced by certain pharmaceuticals: “‘I mean, it’s my theory that I did it,’ Barris said. ‘Under posthypnotic suggestion, evidently.
With an amnesia block. . . . Possibly . . . to cause
dissension to break out [about] whom we can trust,
who is our enemy, and like that’” (A Scanner
Darkly, 53).

Dick, Philip K.

The compulsively suspicious scrutiny applied by
Dick’s protagonists to their circumstances typically
effects an uncanny return of metaphysical speculation in accord with his validation of pop culture:
“the symbols of the divine show up in our world initially at the trash stratum” (Valis, 212). As Dick’s critique of capitalist production-consumption regimes
became increasingly absorbed in indeterminacy, the
conspiratorial agendas of oligarchies were personified as entrepreneurial trickster demigods. In Ubik
a ubiquitously promoted product approximates
deity in promising to be all things to all people,
although—as “a further hoax, to bewilder them that
much more” (Ubik, 212)—it might not exist at all.
Similarly, The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch
concerns a battle for the market between two hallucinogenic drugs, Can-D, a palliative, and Chew-Z, a
wafer that seems to place the receiver in communion with a demonic higher reality.
Like so much of U.S. conspiracy thinking, Dick’s
paranoid scenarios ultimately situate the economic
and the political on essentially gnostic metaphysical
foundations (“I think we’re living in some other
world than what we see” [Time Out of Joint, 138]).
Like their creator, Dick’s protagonists live in a universe of intimations, visitations, and epiphanies.
And like him, they seem to be inspired by the
thought of being conspired against because conspiracy makes you feel that you are at the center of
the universe. Goaded by the violent incursions of
indiscernible political or commercial power, their
complicity resides in the ingenious way they reconstruct their daily existence by linking seemingly
incongruent phenomena and events. Obsessively
scanning the environment for clues and traces of
unseen powers, they speculate themselves into cul
de sacs, where they repeatedly revisit unsolvable
enigmas: “‘The clues we are getting don’t give us a
solution; they only show us how far-reaching the
wrongness is. . . . [They have] introduced confusion rather than verification. . . . What’s it
mean?’. . . . Ragle found himself poking through
reality. . . . a splitting rent opening up, a great gash”
(Time Out of Joint, 180).
Dick’s speculative fictions almost uniquely
occupy the nexus where various “high” and “low”

traditions of U.S. conspiracy thinking and paranoid
world-designs converge. More accessible because
less densely allusive than Melville or Pynchon, Dick
tapped the conversation between U.S. vernacular
and popular cultures, overhearing subliminally
encoded communiqués of sublime revelation and
subversive admonition. For this reason his ideas
seem comparable to those of other eccentric autodidacts of the U.S. tradition of carnivalesque metaphysics: Charles Fort’s assurance that “we are property”; Richard Shaver’s account of malign robots
inhabiting “the Hollow Earth”; Elijah Muhammad’s
revelation that the white race was devolved from
the black by a cosmic “big head scientist” [sic]; L.
Ron Hubbard’s claim that humans derive from
incorporeal entities who became entrapped and
self-forgetful while playing at “the game” of incarnation. However, Dick’s bouts with psychological
dysfunction, legendary binges on mind-altering
substances, and heartfelt terror of FBI cooptation
lend existential authenticity to his (knowingly) outrageous conspiratorial fabulations. In 1974 he
reputedly received coded pictographic revelations
beamed from a “Vast Active Living Intelligence System”—an event fictionalized in Valis, his magnum
opus. The Exegesis, a two-million-word, 1,000+
page commentary on this experience develops the
premise that time/space are delusional—an experimental labyrinth devised as a game by higher
beings. Dick sporadically believed he had been contacted by the original, now immortal, Christian
resistors to the tyranny of the Roman Empire, who
had come into Watergate America to help bring
down Richard Nixon (“The Savior woke me temporarily, & temporarily I remembered my true
nature & task, through the saving gnosis, but I must
be silent, because of the true, secret, transtemporal
early Christians at work, hidden among us as ordinary humans” [Sutin 1995, 288]).
His more radical epiphanies notwithstanding,
Dick’s vision of how consensus reality might be produced by the conspiratorial manipulation of simulacra has passed into the mainstream through Hollywood films based on his novels (Total Recall, Blade
Runner, Minority Report) or reflecting the appropriation of his conceptual paradigm (Capricorn One,
223

Disunion, Fears of

The Truman Show, The Matrix). His analysis has
much in common with postmodern practitioners of
“the hermeneutics of suspicion” such as Jean Baudrillard and Frederic Jameson, who have praised his
work.
David Brottman
See also: Film and Conspiracy Theory; Mind
Control; Paranoia.
References
Baudrillard, Jean. 1994. Simulacra and Simulation.
Translated by Sheila Faria Glaser. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Dick, Philip K. 1969. Time Out of Joint.
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
———. 1999. A Scanner Darkly. London: Gollancz.
———. 2000. Ubik. London: Gollancz.
———. 2001. Valis. London: Gollancz.
Freeman, Carl, ed. 1988. Science Fiction Studies 15.
Sutin, Lawrence. 1989. Divine Invasions: A Life of
Philip K. Dick. New York: Harmony.
Sutin, Lawrence, ed. 1995. The Shifting Realities of
Philip K. Dick: Selected Literary and
Philosophical Writings. New York: Vintage.
Warrick, Patricia. 1987. Mind in Motion: The Fiction
of Philip K. Dick. Carbondale: Southern Illinois
University Press.

Disunion, Fears of
The 1780s seemed to many to be a truly critical
period for the newly independent United States.
By 1787 proposals for disunion had circulated
throughout the states, and suspicions of disunionist
conspiracy gripped the nation. Between 1781 and
1788, when the country functioned under the Articles of Confederation, economic dislocation and
diplomatic difficulties converged to threaten the
survival of the fledgling nation. Domestic political
stalemate rendered Congress unable to take corrective measures. The thirteen states simply could
not agree on a course of action. As the decade progressed, the states divided into regional factions,
and fears grew that the country would break apart
into regional political entities.
Regional Factionalism
The American regions had always perceived differences among themselves. Virginians and Massa224

chusetts Puritans were already trading insults by
the 1650s, and throughout the colonial period people stressed the forces of climate, geography, economy, religion, manners, and customs that bound
them together within each region but differentiated them from their extraregional neighbors. New
England, the South, the Mid-Atlantic, and the
western frontier all brought different, and often
opposing, needs and expectations to the confederation government. By 1787 it seemed to many that
such differences simply could not be resolved, that
one government could not serve the needs of all.
Despite increasing similarities of all regions over
the eighteenth century, opposing regional interests
and identities had fully crystallized by the time of
independence, and people from different regions
began to see each other as enemies.
Flare-ups of regional tension occurred throughout the decade. Alexander Hamilton noted in 1781
that support for the war tended to be regional in
correspondence to the area under duress by
British forces at any given time. Early in 1783, as
Congress debated the perpetual problem of revenue, accusations flew that certain states were
benefiting at the expense of others. Nathaniel
Gorham of Massachusetts warned that states with
common interests were seeking their own confederation because of the impasse. James Madison of
Virginia clearly understood that Gorham was talking about regional divisions, for he worried to his
fellow Virginian Edmund Randolph that such an
occurrence would make the southern states easy
prey for New England. Regional hostility exploded
in 1786 over diplomatic negotiations with Spain.
Southerners insisted that Spain grant the United
States navigation rights to the Mississippi River,
while New Englanders sought commercial privileges with the European nation. When Spain
offered a commercial treaty at the expense of navigation rights, New Englanders favored the
arrangement, while southerners believed that New
England was literally trying to sell them down the
river. For their part, when the South blocked passage of the proposed treaty, New Englanders
fumed that the South meant to strangle their commercial lifeline.

Disunion, Fears of

Fears of Disunionist Conspiracy
The idea that separate governments might better
serve the American regions received increasing
attention in New England during the confederation period. At first used as a warning in an attempt
to garner interregional cooperation, some New
Englanders seriously contemplated the benefits of
separate governments based on regional affiliation.
They pointed to the opposing interests of the
regions and the resulting political stalemate. New
England alone, however, could pursue its own
interests without southern interference. Following
up on Gorham’s 1783 remark in Congress, Massachusetts politicians wrote among themselves in
1785 about the possibilities of regional confederations within the Articles government. During the
diplomatic crisis of 1786, their tone became more
serious as the concerned leaders began to contemplate outright disunion in their correspondence.
Such contemplation inflamed the fears of those
who perceived a disunionist conspiracy. During the
heated debate over diplomacy in 1786 James Monroe of Virginia began a letter campaign to warn fellow Virginians of intrigue. Men in Massachusetts
were scheming, he proclaimed. Plans were underfoot to break up the United States into regional governments. Should circumstances progress far
enough, he asserted, it would be necessary for the
South to go to war with New England over Philadelphia, a commercial center the South badly needed.
Monroe was not alone in his fears. The respected
Philadelphia physician Benjamin Rush wrote to an
English correspondent that autumn of specific plans
to divide the union into three confederacies, Eastern, Middle, and Southern. In late 1786 and early
1787, political leaders from North Carolina, South
Carolina, and Virginia worried among themselves
about the prospect of disunion and competing
regional governments, and David Humphries of
Connecticut shared similar concerns with George
Washington. Even foreign observers noted the possibility. As early as 1784 Richard Champion, a
British writer, predicted that the United States
would break up into three distinct republics, and
advocated a foreign policy based on the prospect.
Regarding the regional stalemate over Spanish

diplomacy in 1786, the French minister to the
United States wrote his government that the South
and New England were engaged in a power struggle. He suggested that navigation of the Mississippi
River provided only the occasion, not the cause, of
the regional hostility and disunionist schemes.
Providing further fodder for conspiracy theories
of disunion, concrete proposals for breaking up the
United States into several governments circulated
in the spring of 1787 in the newspapers of all states.
The articles asserted that the regional divisions of
climate and geography could never be overcome by
positive law, and therefore the regions should form
separate political entities. Specifically directed to
the upcoming Philadelphia Convention, one recommended that the convention consider regional
governments, rather than revising or replacing the
Articles of Confederation. In Philadelphia, the delegates did not consider disunion, but made continual reference to the possibility as the undesirable
alternative.
At the Philadelphia Convention, the idea of disunionist conspiracy provided a bogeyman to attack.
Perceptions of conspiracy fears also shaped the ratification debates. Federalists asserted that failure to
ratify the new Constitution would result in disunion,
new regional power structures, and interregional
competition and warfare. Thus Anti-Federalists,
Federalists claimed, supported disunion because
they argued against ratification. Anti-Federalists
protested their innocence, but fears of disunion lay
deep enough for Federalists to continue to use the
issue, and they often focused their arguments more
on the evils of disunion than the virtues of the proposed Constitution. The accusations of disunionist
conspiracy subsided with ratification, but continued
to surface throughout the early years of the Republic, most notably in the turmoil occasioned by the
1798 Alien and Sedition Acts, the Hartford Convention of 1814, the nullification crisis of 1832, and in
the decade preceding the Civil War.
Cheryl Collins
See also: Alien and Sedition Acts; Anti-Federalists;
Hamilton, Alexander; Hartford Convention;
Nullification; Slave Power.

225

Dollar Bill

References
Davis, Joseph L. 1974. Sectionalism in the
Continental Congress. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Jensen, Merrill, John P. Kaminski, and Gaspare J.
Saladino, eds. 1976–. The Documentary History
of the Ratification of the Constitution. Vol. 13.
Madison: State Historical Society of Wisconsin.
Onuf, Peter S. 1988. “Constitutional Politics: States,
Sections, and the National Interest.” In Toward a
More Perfect Union: Six Essays on the
Constitution, ed. Neil L. Young. Provo, UT:
Brigham Young University.
Willis, Cheryl Collins. 2001. Regionalism in the
Confederation Period: Fears of Disunion and the
Ambiguities of Constitutional Ratification. M.A.
thesis, University of Utah.

Dollar Bill
The unique and esoteric symbolism of the Great
Seal on the dollar bill has long been the subject of
speculation and debate among conspiracy theorists. Many have linked the origin of the familiar
symbols to the Masons or other secret or occult
societies. The incorporation of these symbols into
the Great Seal of the United States of America has
been viewed as a sign that secret societies are controlling the nation and are attempting to assert control over the world.
After signing the Declaration of Independence,
the Second Continental Congress decided that a seal
should be designed for the new nation. After several
years and the formation of several committees, the
design was approved in June 1782. Members of the
committee that selected the Great Seal included
Benjamin Franklin, John Adams, and Thomas Jefferson. Franklin and Adams were Masons, as were
many of the nation’s founders (including George
Washington). The exact number of Masons among
the founders has been a matter of debate. Some
Masonic historians and conspiracy theorists view the
Freemasons as the driving force behind the American Revolution and believe that they continue
secretly to influence the U.S. government to the
present. It is only natural, then, that the Great Seal
would symbolize the Masonic brotherhood.
The front of the seal, which is on the right-hand
side of the back of the dollar bill, depicts an eagle
226

holding an olive branch and arrows. The eagle has
been the traditional symbol of American liberty for
generations, but there has been speculation that the
eagle was originally supposed to be a phoenix. The
phoenix, which represents rebirth, dates to the time
of the ancient Egyptians and has also been an important symbol in Masonic ceremonies and mythology.
It represents being initiated and reborn into the
Masonic brotherhood as well as being reborn into
wisdom. The phoenix is the symbol of the thirty-third
degree of Masonry, the highest level members of the
Scottish Rite of Masonry can obtain. In occult circles,
the phoenix is associated with the lost civilization of
Atlantis. Early depictions of the Great Seal show a
bird with a long, narrow neck and a tuft of feathers
on the back of the head. While this description is
very different from that of a bald eagle, it fits the traditional description of a phoenix. Conspiracy proponents believe the bird on the early seal was a phoenix.
The presence of the phoenix is thought to have
implied that the United States would become a new
Atlantis guided by the Masons. The phoenix/eagle on
the seal has thirty-two feathers on the right wing and
thirty-three on the left, symbolizing again the highest
levels of Scottish Rite Masonry. The bird’s nine tail
feathers are thought to represent the nine orders of
the York Rite of Masonry. The scroll in the mouth of
the phoenix/eagle is inscribed with the familiar
phrase “E Pluribus Unum,” which translates as
“From Many to One.” Usually this phrase has been
assumed to refer to the uniting of the thirteen former
colonies. It has also been said to reference the rise of
monotheism. Conspiracy theorists see a double
meaning in this phrase and believe it also represents
the unity of the brotherhood of Masons and their
plans to bring the entire world under the control of
one secret organization. In later attempts to downplay the Masonic imagery in the eyes of the public,
the eagle slowly replaced the phoenix, but the tuft of
feathers is still visible on the back of the eagle’s head.
The other side of the Great Seal, which is on the
left-hand side of the back of the dollar bill, has
been considered even more controversial. In the
center of the seal is a pyramid without a capstone.
Above it, in a triangle, floats the “All Seeing Eye of
God,” projecting rays of light. The unfinished pyra-

Domestic Terrorism

mid plays a major role in the symbolism of the
Masons. The pyramid without a top represents the
loss of ancient wisdom and the connection to God.
When a person obtains the rank of Master Mason,
they themselves become the capstone and a link to
the divine. The pyramid also signifies the release of
the Israelites from Egypt and is viewed as a symbol
of freedom. Across the base of the pyramid on the
seal is the date 1776 in Roman numerals, the year
American independence was declared. A double
meaning has also been attributed to this date, as
1776 was also the year the Illuminati, another
secret society, was formed in Bavaria. Two sayings
appear on the back of the seal. “Annuit Coeptis,”
which translates as “ He Favors Our Undertakings,”
appears above the pyramid and the “All Seeing
Eye.” Across the bottom of the seal it reads “Novus
Ordo Seclorum” or “New Order of the Ages.”
Among conspiracy theorists, this has been considered proof of the existence of the “New World
Order,” which is thought to be a network of secret
societies and organizations with cross-membership
that is working to create a world government controlled by a handful of powerful elites.
The number thirteen has a recurring role in the
symbolism of the Great Seal. In the cloud above the
eagle’s head are thirteen stars. There are thirteen
arrows in one of the eagle’s talons and an olive
branch with thirteen leaves in the other. The shield
has thirteen stripes. The pyramid is made up of thirteen levels including the “All Seeing Eye.” Both “E
Pluribus Unum” and “Annuit Caeptis” contain thirteen letters. Despite the number thirteen’s obvious
symbolic connection to the thirteen original
colonies, the recurring number has been viewed
with suspicion. The number thirteen has numerous
occult meanings, both positive and negative.
On the front of the dollar bill, unconnected with
the Great Seal, is another supposed symbol of
Freemasonry. The seal of the United States Treasury Department contains the Scales of Justice, a
key, and a square. All three of these items are considered to be important Masonic symbols used in
initiation ceremonies. Many conspiracy theorists
agree that the Freemasons and the New World
Order conspirators control the world’s leading

financial institutions and use them to exert their
will, and the Masonic and occult symbolism on the
dollar bill is viewed as proof of this. Conventional
historians tend to make a different interpretation.
While most agree that there are elements of
Masonic influence on the Great Seal of the United
States, they believe that these elements were used,
intentionally or unintentionally, because of their
familiarity to the creators.
Thomas White
See also: Anti-Masonic Party; Freemasonry;
Illuminati; New World Order.
References
Barrett, David V. 1999. Secret Societies: From the
Ancient and Arcane to the Modern and
Clandestine. London: Blanford.
Flynn, Ted. 2000. Hope for the Wicked: The Master
Plan to Rule the World. Herndon, VA: MaxKol
Communications Inc.
Marrs, Jim. 2001. Rule by Secrecy: The Hidden
History that Connects the Trilateral Commission,
the Freemasons, and the Great Pyramids. New
York: Perennial.
Southwell, David, and Sean Twist. 1999. Conspiracy
Files. London: Carlton.

Domestic Terrorism
Since the mid-1990s domestic terrorism has been
strongly associated with conspiracy theories. While
acts of domestic terrorism have no necessary relationship to conspiracy theories, the two have been
linked in two major ways. First, conspiracy theories
have been defined as causes for, or leading to,
domestic terrorism. In this thinking, particular
conspiracy beliefs lead to acts of domestic terrorism. Second, a number of conspiracy theories have
arisen about acts of domestic terrorism. In other
words, conspiracy theories provide explanations for
what is behind terrorism. Because of both of these
aspects, there is a strong link between domestic
terrorism and conspiracy theories.
Definitions
The terms “terrorism” and “terrorist” have been
used to describe a wide range of violent actions
against societies and governments. One of the major
227

Domestic Terrorism

Nothing but rubble remains of the front side of the destroyed Federal Building in the Oklahoma City bombing
aftermath. On 19 April 1995, a fuel-and-fertilizer truck bomb exploded in front of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal
Building, killing 168 people. Timothy McVeigh was convicted on first-degree murder charges for the worst terror attack
on U.S. soil up to that time. (Ralf-Finn Hestoft/CORBIS SABA)

definitional difficulties associated with domestic terrorism, regardless of the connection to conspiracy
theories, is coming up with a clear and rigorous
meaning that is consensual. There is no clear agreement on what domestic terrorism is. For example,
an armed and violent political organization can be
classified as a terrorist group or as freedom fighters,
depending on the political perspective of the classifier. Also, there are differing opinions whether the
notion of domestic terrorism applies solely to actions
carried out by ordinary individuals, or to actions carried out by the state and its agents.
In addition, there are also at least two ways of
defining “domestic.” It could mean a violent political act that takes place within the national borders
of the United States, the most famous example
being the 11 September 2001 destruction of the
World Trade Center. Even though the alleged terrorist network responsible for the act was interna228

tional in nature, the fact that it happened on U.S.
soil makes it an act of domestic terrorism. The other
definition of “domestic” requires that the perpetrators themselves be citizens of the nation under
attack. The most famous case here is the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Building, carried out by Timothy McVeigh, a U.S. citizen.
With all of these differences it is no wonder that
Richard E. Rubinstein, director of the Center for
Conflict Analysis and Resolution, once argued that
a “definition of terrorism is hopeless . . . terrorism is
just violence that you don’t like.”
The United States Department of Justice
defines domestic terrorism as “the unlawful use of
force or violence, committed by a group(s) of two
or more individuals, against persons or property to
intimidate or coerce a government, the civilian
population, or any segment thereof, in furtherance
of political or social objectives.” This definition has

Domestic Terrorism

been modified to accent the target of domestic terrorism, namely, civilians or noncombatants.
History
While domestic terrorism may seem to be a twentieth-century (if not 1990s) phenomenon, history
provides numerous acts that could fit the definition. The word “terror” can at least be traced back
to the Reign of Terror conducted after the French
Revolution in 1789, in which thousands were executed in order to prevent and intimidate counterrevolutionary forces. In U.S. history, the Boston
Tea Party has been viewed as a terrorist act, insofar
as it was a public display of violence and destruction to achieve political and social ends (antiBritish taxation). The American Revolution itself,
in this view, depended on domestic terrorism
against British colonizers to accomplish its goals.
A variety of rebellions arose in the first 100 years
of the United States that could be characterized as
terrorist. The Whiskey Rebellion tax revolt, suppressed by federal troops in 1794, was a case where
military forces brutally responded to a violent
uprising. During the mid-1800s, religious fundamentalism became violent, especially in the case of
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints
(the Mormons). Mormon insurrections were frequent in the Midwest and in Utah, as the beliefs
and practices of the church (especially polygamy)
clashed with dominant Christian beliefs and local
laws. Rebellious Mormons ambushed and slaughtered over 100 California-bound migrants, which
provoked a military response by President James
Buchanan. Mormon protestors employed guerrilla
tactics against the federal troops.
During the Civil War, wartime tactics that easily
fall under the category of “domestic terrorism”
were employed by both sides. After the Civil War,
the Ku Klux Klan was formed in order to enact vigilante justice and protect white southerners. Their
tactics, including the burning of crosses, property
destruction, obstructing blacks from voting, beatings, and lynchings were all designed to intimidate
citizens (as well as government officials) through
terror. In the late nineteenth century and early
twentieth century, labor struggles often included

elements of terror. From anarchist assassinations
and bombings to the company-hired strikebreaking
Pinkertons, violence and intimidation were tactics
employed to further political and social ends.
During the late 1960s and early 1970s, extreme
protest took on a new character. The wave of
demonstrations and riots sometimes turned violent,
often with provocation by police forces (as, for
example, during the 1968 Chicago Democratic
Convention). At Kent State University in 1970, four
demonstrators were shot dead by National Guard
troops. The Vietnam War period also saw the rise of
antiestablishment and antiracist organizations that
at times resorted to violence to further their goals.
Premier among them was the Weather Underground Organization (formerly the Weathermen),
who were blamed for a series of bombings (including the U.S. Capitol building), bank robberies, and
shootings during this era. Their attempt to instigate
a socialist revolution through violent provocation
also included the jailbreak of Timothy Leary. Also
active during this time was the Symbionese Liberation Army, whose claim to fame was the kidnapping
and recruitment (or brainwashing, depending on
your perspective) of Patty Hearst, granddaughter of
newspaper magnate William Randolph Hearst.
Contemporary Domestic Terrorism
The last twenty years of the twentieth century saw
an explosion in the number of domestic terrorist
groups, as well as the interests that motivate them.
The U.S. Department of Justice classifies domestic
terrorist groups into six categories: (1) violent
Puerto Rican independence groups, (2) anti-Castro
Cubans, (3) left wing, (4) right wing, (5) Jewish
extremist, and (6) special interest. Among the last
category’s members are antiabortion extremists,
responsible for physical and psychological intimidation of abortion providers and patients, including
the bombing of clinics and the murders of abortion
providers. Groups like Operation Rescue, the
Army of God, and the American Coalition for Life
Activists have been implicated in, or accused of
endorsing, a number of these crimes.
Ecoterrorism, done in the name of environmental preservation, has also come under recent
229

Domestic Terrorism

scrutiny. Animal rights organizations that use
harassment and intimidation fall under this category (e.g., the Animal Liberation Front, which targets institutions that conduct unethical research on
animals, as well as those that profit from this mistreatment). In addition, more general environmental activists like Earth First! and the Earth Liberation Front have been dubbed domestic terrorists
(the latter by the FBI in 2001).
In the 1990s, domestic terrorism achieved a
prominence that it never had before. On 26 February 1993, the World Trade Center was rocked by
a bomb in its underground garage. The explosion,
caused by a homemade fertilizer bomb, killed six
people and injured more than a thousand. On 4
March 1994, the jury found Mohammad Salameh,
Ahmad M. Ajaj, Mahmud Abouhalima, and Nidel
Ayyad guilty on thirty-eight counts related to the
bombing. This event was an act of domestic terrorism only according to the definition that emphasizes the place of the event (on U.S. soil). The Arab
identities and foreign citizenship of the convicted
perpetrators would make this an act of international terrorism under other definitions. Similarly,
the 11 September 2001 terrorist attack on the
World Trade Center and the Pentagon, and the
downing of the airplane over Pennsylvania, can be
seen in this light. The ongoing investigation into
9/11 is primarily focused on an international terrorist network, especially Al-Qaeda and Osama Bin
Laden.
Conspiracy theories have abounded with these
WTC attacks. One proposed motivation for the
attacks is the alleged conspiratorial tendencies of
the Arab mentality. Daniel Pipes’s work on Arab
paranoia stresses how conspiracy theories are a
part of daily life in the Middle East. The antisemitic and anti-Western nature of these theories,
according to some analysts, leads to extremist
behavior. A number of other conspiracy theories
point to other sources. In the 1993 attack, the fact
that an FBI informant had provided much of the
damning evidence against the accused has led to
the belief that the FBI agent was a provocateur;
that is, someone who incited and provided the
materials for the bombing. In the 2001 attack,
230

numerous theories abounded that the terror was a
result of (1) an inside job in the U.S. government
designed to provoke a global war and domestic
martial law; or (2) a Mossad (the Israeli secret service) conspiracy to incite anti-Arab sentiment
around the world and evoke support for Israel’s
policies. Some theories combined the two narratives, arguing that the purpose of the terrorist acts
was to usher in a New World Order and perhaps
the final Armageddon.
Oklahoma City and the Militias
A number of domestic terrorist acts occurred in the
1990s, including the 1996 Atlanta Olympic bombing and the continued bombings of the Unabomber
(which led to the arrest of Ted Kaczinski). Along
with these came the increasing threat of chemical
and biological terrorism, which erupted in Japan
with the 1996 Sarin gas attacks by the Aum Shinrikyo cult, and spilled over into the twenty-first century with the post-9/11 anthrax mailings. But the
event that dramatically propelled domestic terrorism and conspiracy theories into the public arena
was the 1995 bombing of the Federal Building in
Oklahoma City. In addition to the scale of the
destruction (169 dead, including 19 children), what
was significant about this event was the fact that it
was done by U.S. citizens against other U.S. citizens. Timothy J. McVeigh, a white Desert Storm
veteran, was arrested and subsequently executed
for the crime. During his trial, the prosecution
stressed that a major motivation for the bombing
was McVeigh’s conspiracy beliefs. Most significantly, McVeigh believed in a government conspiracy and cover-up in the 1993 destruction of the
Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Texas. The
David Koresh–led religious organization had lost
eighty-seven members in a fiery end to a monthslong siege, when federal law-enforcement agents
stormed the residence with tanks and CS gas. The
date of the assault, 19 April 1993, was two years to
the day before the Oklahoma City bombing.
Timothy McVeigh, an avid consumer of Waco
conspiracy theories, became the exemplar for the
dangerous results these beliefs could produce. His
alleged brief experience with the militia movement

Domestic Terrorism

propelled these armed groups into national prominence. While militias were never legally linked to
the Oklahoma City bombing, much media scrutiny
was placed on them, and the Patriot network in
general. This loose collection of disgruntled citizens included tax resisters, constitutionalists, white
supremacists, Christian Identity members, rightto-bear-arms activists, and general antigovernment
protestors. Conspiracy theories were often associated with the Patriot movement, especially theories
that proposed that a New World Order was imminent. The image of the conspiracy-obsessed militia
member anchored the link between conspiracy
beliefs and violent domestic terrorism. This association was spread by official government spokespeople, private watchdog organizations (such as
the Anti-Defamation League and the Center on
Hate and Extremism), think-tank experts, scholars,
and even Hollywood films (like the 1999 film
Arlington Road).
At the same time, there were plenty of conspiracy theories about the Oklahoma City bombing
itself. Steven Jones, McVeigh’s lawyer, published a
book-length account that claimed McVeigh was a
foot soldier in a larger network of domestic and
international terrorists. David Hoffman, in his book
The Oklahoma City Bombing and the Politics of
Terror (1998), provides the most thorough example
of these theories. Hoffman meticulously arranges
the loose ends developed by other conspiracy theorists (including the two-blast theory, that there was
more than one explosion recorded); the lack of
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF)
agents in the building during the bombing; the ATF
informant Carol Howe’s testimony; the eyewitness
accounts of McVeigh accomplices; and numerous
other details) into a broad account of why the
bombing occurred. Along with Adam Parfrey, Hoffman makes the argument that terrorism, to be
effective, requires a claim of responsibility. No one
claimed responsibility for the bombing, and many
militia groups condemned the act.
Like many Patriot members, Hoffman charges
that the Murrah Building bombing was planned
and executed by government insiders, in coordination with foreign agents, in order to turn popular

support away from antigovernment groups and
towards government institutions. According to this
theory McVeigh was a patsy, similar to Lee Harvey
Oswald in the Kennedy assassination. The bombing was pseudoterrorism, a pretext for the passage
of the Anti-Terrorism Act and the widespread curtailing of civil liberties.
This theory about the Oklahoma City bombing
draws on longer standing theories about terrorism
in general—namely the “strategy of tension.” The
“strategy of tension,” it is argued, is a counterinsurgency tactic that involves staging violence in order
to blame it on one’s enemy. The 1933 Reichstag fire,
allegedly started by Nazi forces, was blamed on
Communist groups to turn popular German support to the Nazi regime. Operation Gladio, which
took place primarily in Italy in the 1970s, involved
government infiltration and provocation of leftist
groups to commit acts of terror. Some conspiracy
theories argue that many of the pretexts for the
twentieth century’s wars (the sinking of the Lusitania and the USS Maine, the Gulf of Tonkin incident, and Pearl Harbor) were deliberately engineered to garner popular support for going to war.
Jack Z. Bratich
See also: Boston Tea Party; COINTELPRO;
Freemasonry; Haymarket Bombing; Lusitania,
Sinking of; Militias; Mormonism; Nativism; New
World Order; Oklahoma City Bombing; One-World
Government; Pearl Harbor; Pentagon Papers;
Tonkin Gulf Incident; Unabomber ; USS Maine,
Sinking of; Waco; Weathermen; Whiskey Rebellion.
References
Berlet, Chip, and Matthew N. Lyons. 1995. “Militia
Nation.” The Progressive, June, 22–25.
Bracken, Len. 1999. The Arch Conspirator.
Kempton, IL: Adventures Unlimited Press.
Chaitkin, Anton. “Secret Roots of the KKK.”
Paranoia: The Conspiracy Reader 2 (5): 38–41.
Constantine, Alex. 1997. Virtual Government: CIA
Mind Control Operations in America. Venice, CA:
Feral House.
Epperson, A. Ralph. 1985. The Unseen Hand.
Tuscon, AZ: Publius Press.
Gardner, James. 1997. The Age of Extremism: The
Enemies of Compromise in American Politics,
Culture, and Race Relations. New York: Birch
Lane Press.

231

Dominion Theology

George, James, and Laird Wilcox. 1996. American
Extremists: Militias, Supremacists, Klansmen,
Communists, and Others. Amherst, NY:
Prometheus Books.
Hieronimus, Robert. 1989. America’s Secret
Destiny: Spiritual Vision and the Founding of a
Nation. Rochester, VT: Destiny Books.
Hoffman, David. 1998. The Oklahoma City
Bombing and the Politics of Terror. Venice, CA:
Feral House Publishing.
Martinez, Miguel. “Oklahoma City, Italian Style.”
Paranoia: The Conspiracy Reader. 4 (1): 8–11.
Parfrey, Adam. 1995. “Finding Our Way Out of
Oklahoma.” Pp. 322–347 in Cult Rapture, ed.
Adam Parfrey. Portland, OR: Feral House
Publishing.
Pipes, Daniel. 1997. Conspiracy! How the Paranoid
Style Flourishes and Where It Comes From. New
York: Free Press.
Robins, Robert, and Jerrold M. Post. 1997. Political
Paranoia: The Psychopolitics of Hatred. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
U.S. Department of Justice, National Security
Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation,
Terrorist Research and Analytical Center.
Terrorism in the United States, 1994. Washington,
DC: Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Vankin, Jonathan, and John Whalen. 1998. The 70
Greatest Conspiracy Theories. New York: Citadel
Press.

Dominion Theology
While evangelical Christians agree on expecting the
Second Coming of Christ, they differ as to what they
should do in the meantime. While some argue that
in a fallen world, Christians must confine themselves to the saving of souls, others contend that it is
their duty to seek to reform society’s institutions. In
the late 1970s, the emergence of the Christian Right
marked a considerable step forward for the latter
argument. But what this involved was far from clear.
In part, it entailed a defense of the evangelical subculture against what was seen as a secular humanist
conspiracy. But it also involved attempting to
reverse recent legislative changes, particularly as
regards abortion, and some in the Christian Right
harbored more ambitious aspirations still. The
United States, they argued, had originated as a
Christian nation and in the future its institutions
232

should be based on the Bible. In arguing this, the
more intransigent elements in the Christian Right
were drawn to a range of theories about the relationship between God and government that are collectively known as Dominion theology.
The central biblical text for Dominionists is Genesis 1: 26–28, where God declares that man shall
have dominion over all the earth. This is seen as
directing believers to create both a Christian government and a Christian culture and has been particularly associated with a school of thought known
as Reconstructionism. Founded by a Presbyterian
thinker, Rousas John Rushdoony, Reconstructionism argues for a free-market economy, the ending of
government-provided education and welfare, and,
most controversially, the restoration of Old Testament sanctions that will include the death penalty
for murder, adultery, homosexuality, and incorrigible
juvenile delinquency. In 1965 Rushdoony founded
Chalcedon Inc., subsequently the Chalcedon Foundation (named after a fifth-century church gathering), but it was not until the 1980s that Reconstructionism began to attract attention from within the
broader Christian community. By this time, Rushdoony had broken with his son-in-law, Gary North,
who would become a particularly prominent publicist for Reconstructionism through his Institute for
Christian Economics and his authoring of a number
of books. A third figure, Gary DeMar, and his group,
American Vision, were another crucial element in
the movement, while a broader organization, the
Coalition for Revival, was set up to bring together
Reconstructionists with other adherents of Dominion theology. Some members, unwilling to adopt the
full Reconstructionist argument, resigned from the
organization, and another dispute, which broke out
at Pat Robertson’s Regent University Law School,
led to the removal of its dean. Tensions among
Dominionists have emerged around a number of
questions. Where Reconstructionism was particularly associated with Presbyterian churches, charismatic Christians (distinguished by their belief in
“speaking in tongues” and divine healing) represented a different tradition. There were differences,
too, over how the so-called creation mandate found
in Genesis related to the return of Christ. Most

Donnelly, Ignatius

evangelicals believed in what was called premillennialism, that Christ’s return would precede the
bringing about of Godly government and then a
final battle with Satan. Reconstructionists, however,
were postmillennialists, believing that they would
come to power before the Second Coming.
Within this milieu, conspiracy thinking found a
ready audience. Rushdoony himself was a supporter
of the John Birch Society, while North wrote the epilogue to a conspiracist text by the John Birch Society
author, Larry Abraham. Subsequently publishing a
version under his own name, North declared that the
enemies of the United States were “a conspiracy of
super-rich and super-powerful insiders.” But behind
them, he declared, was Satan himself.
Martin Durham
See also: Apocalypticism; John Birch Society.
References
Barron, Bruce. 1992. Heaven on Earth. The Social
and Political Agendas of Dominion Theology.
Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Publishing House.
Clarkson, Frederick. 1997. Eternal Hostility. The
Struggle between Theocracy and Democracy.
Monroe, MN: Common Courage Press.
North, Gary. 1986. Conspiracy: A Biblical View.
Westchester, IL : Crossway Books.
Website
Political Research Associates: http://www/publiceye.
org/conspire/clinton/Clintonculwar8-19.htm.

Donnelly, Ignatius
Ignatius Donnelly (1831–1901), known as “the
Prince of Cranks” and “the Apostle of Discontent,”
was a politician, farmer, newspaperman, orator,
reformer, and popular author of an apocalyptic
dystopian novel, who became a leader of the Populist Party in the 1890s. As both a political organizer and movement intellectual, Donnelly contributed greatly to the political culture of the
Populist Party and to the conspiratorial imagination of late-nineteenth-century agrarian radicalism.
In his speeches and writings for the party, Donnelly gave voice to the deeply held belief that the
spread of plutocracy and monopoly capitalism left
the United States “on the verge of moral, political
and material ruin.”

Born in Philadelphia, Donnelly moved to the
utopian community of Nininger in rural Minnesota
in 1856. After the community broke up, Donnelly
remained in Minnesota where he fought for the
“have nots” against the “haves” as lieutenant governor in the state legislature, in Congress, and as the
president of the Minnesota Farmers Alliance.
Donnelly was also a prolific author, writing books
on the existence of Atlantis, the scientific basis for
Armageddon myths, and The Great Cryptogram,
in which he argued that Francis Bacon was the
author of Shakespeare’s plays.
Donnelly’s most important literary work is the
novel Caesar’s Column: A Story of the Twentieth
Century. Published in 1890, Caesar’s Column
extrapolates what he saw as the worst tendencies of
the 1880s—unfettered capitalism, bribery and corruption, the degradation of labor, and the monopolization of culture by the rich—and constructs a narrative around the cataclysmic self-destruction of this
imagined destiny. Set in 1988, Caesar’s Column
begins with the protagonist’s arrival in New York City
by airship where he finds a magnificent city of glasscovered streets and pristine high-rise buildings.
However, this utopia above ground is paralleled by
the hell found underground, where the teeming millions of the working class are brutalized into a nearbestial state. This absolutely divided society is ruled
by an inner council of oligarchs and dictators who
maintain order with a fleet of airships known as
“Demons” armed with poison bombs. While the rich
have grown decadent and autocratic, the working
class has also lost its ideals and organized itself into
the nihilistic Brotherhood of Destruction. Conspiracy thus faces conspiracy and when the rebellion
begins it sets off an uncontrollable riot of looting and
massacre. So many people are killed in this massive
uprising that bodies clog the streets. Imagining himself a conqueror, Caesar Lomellini, the military
leader of the Brotherhood, orders the bodies piled
up in Union Square and encased in concrete, forming a gigantic column to stand as a monument to the
uprising. At the novel’s end, Caesar himself is murdered, and as the city burns the protagonists escape
the conflagration in an airship to begin a new society
in Africa based upon Populist values.
233

The Dorr War

After publishing Caesar’s Column, Donnelly
rose through the Minnesota Farmer’s Alliance to
become one of the leading intellectuals of the Populist movement. Donnelly authored the preamble
to the Populist Party platform of 1892, a philosophical statement that powerfully expresses the
moral and political outrage behind the rapid
growth of the Populist movement among both
farmers and industrial workers. Delivering the preamble in person at the party convention in St.
Louis, Donnelly dramatically asserted: “From the
same prolific womb of governmental injustice we
breed the two great classes—tramps and millionaires. . . . A vast conspiracy against mankind has
been organized on two continents, and it is rapidly
taking possession of the world. If not met and overthrown at once it forebodes terrible social convulsions, the destruction of civilization, or the establishment of an absolute despotism” (Hofstadter).
Donnelly’s suggestion of “a vast conspiracy” of
financial manipulators was interpreted by historian
Richard Hofstadter as evidence of the reactionary
nature of the Populist revolt, and that this “folklore” revealed Populism to be a hayseed movement
that was led by “pseudo-intellectuals” who were
possessed by the “paranoid style of American politics.” However, Donnelly’s statement can also be
read not as evidence of demagoguery, but as a cultural expression of a distinct structure of feeling
that united U.S. farmers and workers in the 1890s.
Increasingly subjected to the manipulation of railroads and banks, and reduced from their proud status as autonomous working men to “wage slaves,”
Populist Party leaders and followers alike articulated this monopolistic intrusion as a deliberate
depravation of their much-prized independence.
Without democratic change, Donnelly demands,
the conspiracy of the present could become the
Caesar’s Column of our future.
Michael Cohen
References
Donnelly, Ignatius. [1890] 1960. Caesar’s Column: A
Story of the Twentieth Century. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Hofstadter, Richard. 1955. The Age of Reform: From
Bryan to FDR. New York: Vintage Press.

234

McMath, Robert C. 1993. American Populism: A
Social History 1877–1898. New York: Hill and
Wang.

The Dorr War
A popular armed uprising in Providence, Rhode
Island, in 1841, the Dorr War sought to extend the
restricted suffrage of the state constitution.
Although some conspiracy-minded historians have
argued that Tammany Hall, the New York Democratic Club, was responsible for the Dorr War or
manipulated unrest over suffrage in Rhode Island
to gain partisan advantage, it appears that Tammany did not enter the picture until late in the dispute and gained very little from it.
Reformers had protested for years about the
right to vote being limited to property owners. By
1840 a majority of adult males no longer owned
real estate in Rhode Island, but many did possess a
significant amount of personal property. Suffrage
requirements were contained in the royal charter
granted by King Charles II in 1663, which became
Rhode Island’s constitution in 1776. The charter
also apportioned representation on the distribution
of population as it was in 1663, so that as people
moved from rural areas to the cities, urban
dwellers became vastly underrepresented.
In 1811 the Rhode Island Senate with a Republican majority passed a bill to extend the suffrage, but
the Federalists in the House defeated it. Popular
agitation began with a mass meeting in Providence
in 1820, and the legislature responded by putting
the suffrage question to a vote of the people. But
with only property owners voting, it lost 1,600 to
1,900. In 1825, when a convention to rewrite the
state constitution considered extending the suffrage,
only three delegates voted for it. Then, qualified
landowners voted against ratifying the proposal,
which contained a reapportionment. Four years
later, 2,000 persons appealed to the legislature to
extend the suffrage, but the House reported that
landholders were “the only sound part of the community.” They argued that if the landless did not like
it, they should acquire real property or move elsewhere. In 1832 more petitions met the same fate.

The Dorr War

Growing dissatisfaction manifested itself in the
formation of the Constitutional Party at a meeting
of representatives from ten communities on 22
February 1834 in Providence. The next month
twenty-nine-year-old attorney Thomas Wilson
Dorr, Harvard class of 1823, addressed another
meeting of delegates from twelve towns. When
only 700 persons voted for its candidates in 1837,
the party disbanded.
Then, in the autumn of 1840, Dr. J. A. Brown
organized an anti-Whig group called the Rhode
Island Suffrage Association, which spread to every
town in the state. It published a paper called the
New Age, held mass meetings characterized by
lively speeches, wore badges, waved banners, and
paraded with a band. When the legislature
rebuffed the people’s petitions, the association
called for a People’s Day on 17 April 1840. Three
thousand attended the demonstration in Providence and adjourned to Newport the next day,
where delegates appointed a committee to call a
People’s Constitutional Convention, and paraded
through town, several carrying guns.
Events moved rapidly. On 28 August 1841, 7,512
people voted for delegates to the People’s Convention, which drafted a constitution on 4 October.
They revised it on 16 November and called for its
ratification. From 27–29 December, 13,944 people
voted for, 52 against. The People’s candidate for
governor was the same dedicated and obstinate
Thomas Dorr, who had addressed the Constitutional Party meeting in 1834. He was the son of an
aristocratic Woonsocket manufacturer, a respected
member of the community, a onetime Federalist,
an anti-Jackson Whig, a pro–Van Buren Democrat,
president of the Providence School Committee,
treasurer of the Rhode Island Historical Society,
and representative in the state legislature. On 18
April 1842, 6,359 people voted for him to lead a
new People’s government.
But the charter authorities were not idle. They
opposed what they considered a usurpation of
authority and provided severe penalties for those
who ran for office or voted in the People’s election.
To prevent his being arrested, Dorr called for an
armed escort on inauguration day, 3 May. According

to the Providence Daily Journal, 3,000 people
marched in the inaugural parade, approximately 850
under arms. The next day the charter government
declared Rhode Island in a state of insurrection.
On 17 May Dorr and seventy armed volunteers
forced a six-man, sword-armed guard to surrender
the Armory of the United Train of Artillery and
captured two six-pound cannons. By 1:00 A.M. the
next day Dorr’s troops dwindled to 250 men. They
approached the Providence Arsenal in a fog under
a flag of truce, and Dorr demanded the Arsenal
surrender. From his well-fortified position with an
overwhelming force Colonel Blodgett refused, but
held his fire. Dorr lit the fuses on his cannon.
There was a flash of powder in the pan, but no
report and Dorr and his troops slipped away in the
early morning fog. The next day he escaped to
Connecticut. He tried to establish his government
again and met the same opposition.
The only fatality in Dorr’s War occurred on 27
June. In Chepachet, a group of brick-throwing Dorr
sympathizers from Massachusetts assailed the Kentish Guard at the Pawtucket Bridge. When the
crowd failed to disperse, the Guard volleyed over
their heads. The crowd continued to throw bricks
and the Guard fired into the crowd, killing one man.
On 21 June 1842, the state legislature called a
constitutional convention with delegates apportioned on the basis of the 1840 census. The convention drafted articles extending the suffrage and
redistricting the legislature, and the people ratified
the new document, ending the longtime struggle.
Both sides appealed to the national government
for assistance, but all three branches demurred.
President John Tyler refused to send troops, the
Senate tabled a resolution requiring the president
to inform Congress of his actions, and Chief Justice
Roger Taney, speaking for the Supreme Court in
an 8–1 decision involving a dispute over which government was the proper authority, wrote:
“No one, we believe, has ever doubted the
proposition, that, according to the institutions of
this country, the sovereignty in every State resides
in the people of the State, and that they may alter
and change their form of government at their own
pleasure. But whether they have changed it or not
235

Drugs

by abolishing an old government, and establishing
a new one in its place, is a question to be settled by
the political power. And when that power has
decided, the courts are bound to take notice of its
decision, and to follow it” (Luther v. Borden).
When Dorr returned to Providence in October
1843, after being celebrated by Tammany Hall in
New York, the government arrested him at the City
Hotel, tried him before the state Supreme Court,
and convicted and sentenced him to life in prison.
The legislature released him on 27 June 1845,
restored his civil rights in May 1851, and pardoned
him in January 1854. He died a year later at age
forty-nine.
JeDon A. Emenhiser
References
Emenhiser, JeDon A. 1962. Armed Politics: An
Analysis and Comparison of Six Cases in the
United State. Ph.D. diss., University of
Minnesota.
Frieze, Jacob. 1912. A Concise History of the Efforts
to Obtain an Extension of Suffrage in Rhode
Island, from the Year 1811 to 1842 and the Dorr
War. 3rd ed. Providence, RI: Thoas S. Hammond.
Luther v. Borden. 1849. (48 U.S. 1).
Mowry, Arthur May. 1895. “The Constitutional
Controversy in Rhode Island in 1841.” Pp.
361–370 in Annual Report of the American
Historical Association for the Year 1894.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.

Drugs
Apart from the possibility that the excessive use of
certain drugs can make the user paranoid, illicit
drugs have been at the center of a number of conspiracy theories over the past century. One cluster
of conspiracy theories surrounds the use of opiates,
and another focuses on marijuana.
Opiates
Opiates—opium, morphine, and heroin—have figured largely in drug conspiracies. One of the earliest conspiracy theories surrounding opiates in the
United States concerned Chinese immigrants on
the West Coast. When Chinese immigrants began
236

arriving in the United States around 1870, their
habit of smoking opium drew condemnation. Chinese laborers, derogatorily called “coolies,” were
essential to the completion of the first transcontinental railroad, but when economic depression
beset the country in the late nineteenth century,
white fears of labor competition, combined with
Chinese opium smoking, led to repression of the
Chinese population. Nativism, xenophobia, and the
conviction that opium smoking posed a threat to
U.S. society helped lead to the 1882 Chinese
Exclusion Act, which barred Chinese immigration
to the United States. Other repression came in the
form of local and state laws that targeted Chinese
Americans, as well as harassment by native-born
whites, particularly on the West Coast. In 1875 a
San Francisco City ordinance banned opium smoking. Stories of Chinese immigrants who lured white
females into prostitution, along with media depictions of the Chinese as depraved and unclean, bolstered the enactment of anti-opium laws in eleven
states between 1877 and 1900. On the federal
level, in 1909 President Theodore Roosevelt
signed the Opium Exclusion Act, which forbade
the importation of smoking opium. Although no
fully formed conspiracy theory emerged among
anti-opium advocates, by the turn of the century
the association between Chinese immigrants,
opium, and societal decay illustrated the widespread belief that opium smoking (or the consumption of any psychoactive substance for nonmedical purposes) threatened to erode the
Anglo-Saxon race’s ability to propagate itself. Put
another way, during the Social Darwinist–infused
days of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, drug addiction among white Americans was
thought to result in racial suicide.
More delineated conspiracy theories concerning
opiates materialized during and after World War II.
Propagating numerous drug conspiracies was Harry
J. Anslinger, who served as commissioner of the
Federal Bureau of Narcotics (FBN) from 1930 to
1962. Anslinger had an imposing physical appearance: somber-faced, bald, thick-chested, and
square-jawed, he resembled a cross between Benito
Mussolini and the infamous British satanist Aleister

Drugs

Crowley (Sloman, xi). As head of the FBN,
Anslinger dominated U.S. drug policy for thirty
years, during which time he maintained the link
between foreigners and drugs, brought a high level
of bureaucratic order to federal drug policy,
embarked upon a campaign to demonize and
restrict marijuana, melded antinarcotics policy with
U.S. foreign policy and security issues, and sought
repressive measures to deal with addicts and dealers. During World War II Anslinger charged the
Japanese with conspiring to spread narcotics addiction throughout the West, remarking that a drugsodden nation could offer little resistance to an
invading Japanese military. The Japanese were
flooding China with narcotics during the war but no
evidence corroborated their supposed plan to
foment addiction in the United States. Similarly, in
the early cold war years, Anslinger unrelentingly
maintained that heroin addiction was part of Communist China’s plan for subversion in the United
States. Lacking any proof of such a conspiracy,
Anslinger nonetheless fostered stories and images
of syringe-wielding Chinese soldiers poised to take
over the free world and outlined the details of the
Chinese Communist Party’s heroin conspiracy in his
1953 book The Traffic in Narcotics. Anslinger’s conspiracy theories demonstrated the link between
federal drug policy and national security issues,
which is to say that the FBN’s claims were in line
with America’s anticommunist mission in Asia. The
commissioner never recanted his accusations and
his claims persisted into the 1970s.
In a reversal of Anslinger’s claims, two other drug
conspiracies emerged during the cold war, which
charged the U.S. government, not foreign nations,
with spreading narcotics addiction and using drugs
for undemocratic purposes. One conspiracy theory
accused the CIA, from the 1950s through the 1980s,
of willingly allying itself with narcotics (opium, morphine, and heroin) traffickers in Burma, Thailand,
Laos, Afghanistan, and Pakistan as part of the
agency’s anticommunist crusade in Asia. By supplying these unsavory elements with funds, equipment,
and intelligence, the CIA provided a zone of protection around drug lords and blocked investigations of
their clients’ drug running. Ultimately, the CIA con-

tributed to the global narcotics trade by sanctioning
their allies’ involvement.
Researchers, such as Alfred W. McCoy, have
unearthed evidence corroborating the link between the CIA and narcotics traffickers in Asia but
deny the existence of a full-blown conspiracy in
which the CIA intended to foster trafficking and
addiction internationally, including Europe and the
United States. Rather, the CIA’s short-term goal of
using narcotics traffickers as self-sustaining paramilitary forces during the cold war blinded the
agency from foreseeing the long-term growth in
the region’s drug trade after the U.S. government
no longer needed its clients’ services. In essence,
the CIA, narrowly focused on anticommunism,
deemed its clients’ expanded drug trafficking abilities as only “fallout” from overriding cold war concerns. For instance, when narcotics produced by
CIA allies supplied U.S. addicts—as in the case of
U.S. soldiers in Vietnam using heroin trafficked by
South Vietnamese, Laotian, and Thai officials—the
CIA, bound by law to provide intelligence on drug
trafficking, illegally prevented investigations of
Southeast Asian officials. Damning facts such as
these have lent the air of conspiracy to the CIA’s
relationship to the international drug trade.
Another drug conspiracy leveled at the U.S. government involved the Nixon administration’s drug
policy and the White House’s reorganization of federal drug enforcement agencies. In the early 1970s
President Nixon launched his “war on drugs” in
response to a burgeoning heroin epidemic in the
United States. Like Harry J. Anslinger, Nixon cast
blame on foreign nations for America’s addiction
problem. Nixon favored the use of federal drug
control agencies as the answer to the country’s supposedly growing rates of drug abuse. Part of Nixon’s
solution entailed the creation of the Office of
National Narcotics Intelligence (ONNI), Office for
Drug Abuse and Law Enforcement (ODALE), and
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), which
replaced the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous
Drugs (BNDD), the FBN’s successor agency. The
executive branch oversaw these agencies and critics
accused the president of using them for purposes
not related to drug control. Specifically, skeptics
237

Drugs

argued that Nixon manufactured a drug scare that
distracted the U.S. public and Congress and
allowed the administration to create White House–
controlled federal agencies that were used for surveillance and harassment of political enemies, not
apprehending drug dealers.
Critics charged ODALE and ONNI as being little more than a White House private police force.
ODALE, housed in the Justice Department, was
authorized to conduct no-knock search warrants and
warrantless raids, as well as to use court-ordered
wiretaps. Such an agency had the capacity to act
above the law and did on occasions. Indeed, key figures in the Watergate scandal—G. Gordon Liddy,
Egil Krogh, E. Howard Hunt, and Lucein Conein—
were all involved in federal drug control agencies.
Liddy developed the creation of ODALE. Conein, a
CIA agent, apparently developed a special assassination force—ostensibly aimed at major drug traffickers—within the DEA after that organization’s creation in mid-1973. Krogh served as deputy assistant
for the president for law enforcement and helped
set up the Special Action Office for Drug Abuse
Prevention (SAODAP), which established federal
methadone clinics. Interestingly, the federal methadone clinics—aimed at helping heroin addicts—
drew criticism from African Americans as a ploy to
keep inner-city populations addicted to hard drugs.
In the end, the Plumbers, drawn from the Nixon
administration’s drug control apparatus, and the
resulting Watergate scandal derailed Nixon’s quest
for unchecked executive power.
Marijuana
Like the opiates, conspiracy theories formed around
marijuana, a drug outlawed in 1937 by the Marijuana Tax Act. Similar to the Chinese immigrants’
negative association with opium smoking, marijuana
was linked to another stereotyped immigrant group,
Mexicans. During the first few decades of the 1900s
local and state restrictions on marijuana, particularly
in the West and Southwest, were established as the
drug was purported to cause smokers to commit
crimes. Tales of stoned Mexicans who craved violence and were immune to pain were common.
Throughout the first half of the 1930s Anslinger
238

resisted calls for federal legislation banning marijuana, believing that the states could best control the
matter. But by 1936 Anslinger reversed course and
embarked on a campaign in which he first stated
that he had underestimated the marijuana threat
and then proceeded to depict the weed as worse
than heroin, and the harbinger of death and discord.
Drug policy scholars have attributed Anslinger’s
turnaround to his shrewd concern for bureaucratic
survival—he used the marijuana issue to justify his
and the FBN’s existence.
According to this line of thinking, Anslinger did
not create a marijuana scare; he joined one already
in progress and bolstered it to best of his ability with
lurid testimony at congressional hearings and in
newspaper and magazine articles. Anslinger’s article
“Marijuana: Assassin of Youth,” which appeared in
the July 1937 edition of American Magazine, was a
prime example of FBN antimarijuana propaganda.
The article, as did most of Anslinger’s marijuana horror stories and other sensationalized accounts like
the Hollywood film Reefer Madness, involved American youths and linked the drug with serious crimes
(such as murder, rape, and mutilation), insanity,
promiscuity, and general immorality. For Anslinger,
the consequences of inhaling the killer weed ranged
from patricide and fratricide—as the commissioner
often recounted in the case of a Florida youth—to
the possibility that a user would turn into a “philosopher, a joyous reveler in a musical heaven,” a statement that linked marijuana and jazz music
(Anslinger 1937, 150). The outcome of all the scare
tactics and misinformation was the 1937 Marijuana
Tax Act, which initially curtailed hemp production,
but ultimately served as the basis for criminalizing
marijuana users.
Countering Anslinger’s view of marijuana as a
generator of crime and death is the conspiracy theory best articulated by Jack Herer in Hemp and the
Marijuana Conspiracy: The Emperor Wears No
Clothes. According to Herer, bureaucratic survival
was not at the heart of Anslinger’s antimarijuana
campaign. Rather, Anslinger’s role in demonizing
marijuana stemmed from his participation in a concerted effort by powerful economic interests to
stamp out competition from the hemp industry.

Drugs

Specifically, Anslinger, the E. I. du Pont de
Nemours & Company (DuPont), business magnate
Andrew Mellon, and the media giant William Randolph Hearst worked hand in hand to prevent a
growing hemp industry from offering cellulosebased products, such as paper (and potentially textiles and plastics), from competing with DuPont’s
products. By the 1930s DuPont had developed
patents for producing paper from wood pulp and
also had plans to make plastics from petroleum
products. Andrew W. Mellon, secretary of the treasury and owner of the Mellon Bank of Pittsburgh,
which was one of only two banks DuPont dealt with,
appointed his future son-in-law to head up the
newly created FBN in December 1930. Anslinger’s
appointment to the FBN, housed in the Treasury
Department, tied him to Mellon’s and DuPont’s
financial interests, which included stunting a hemp
industry that had grown over the 1920s and 1930s.
The Hearst newspaper syndicate, the nation’s
largest, was also tied economically to the woodpaper industry. Moreover, Hearst, known for his disdain of jazz music, Mexicans, and African Americans, readily published antimarijuana tracts that put
his newspapers in line with the federal government.
Ultimately, all of these actors constituted a conspiracy orchestrated to make hemp illegal. According to
this theory, the 1937 Marijuana Tax Act, far from
outlawing a supposedly murderous drug, was in fact
legislation designed to further DuPont’s financial
fortune.
Daniel Weimer
See also: CIA; Cocaine; LSD.
References
Anslinger, Harry J., with Courtney Riley Cooper.
1937. “Marijuana: Assassin of Youth.” America
Magazine. July: 18–19, 150–153.
Anslinger, Harry J., and William F. Tompkins. 1953.
The Traffic in Narcotics. New York: Funk and
Wagnalls.
Bonnie, Richard J., and Charles H. Whitebread, III.
1974. The Marihuana Conviction: History of

Marihuana Prohibition in the United States.
Charlottsville: University Press of Virginia.
Courtwright, David T. 1982. Dark Paradise: Opiate
Addiction in America before 1940. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Epstein, Edward J. 1990. Agency of Fear: Opiates
and Political Power in America. Rev. ed. New
York: Verso.
Herer, Jack. 1991. Hemp and the Marijuana
Conspiracy: The Emperor Wears No Clothes. Van
Nuys, CA: HEMP Publishing.
Kinder, Douglas Clark. 1992. “Shutting Out the
Evil: Nativism and Narcotics Control in the
United States.” Pp. 117–142 in Drug Control
Policy: Essays in Historical and Comparative
Perspective, ed. William O. Walker, III. University
Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press.
McCoy, Alfred W. 1990. The Politics of Heroin: CIA
Complicity in the Global Drug Trade. New York:
Lawrence Hill Books.
———. 2000. “Mission Myopia: Narcotics as Fallout
from the CIA’s Covert Wars.” Pp. 118–148 in
National Insecurity: U.S. Intelligence after the
Cold War, ed. Craig Eisendrath. Philadelphia, PA:
Temple University Press.
McWilliams, John C. 1990. The Protectors: Harry J.
Anslinger and the Federal Bureau of Narcotics,
1930–1962. Newark: University of Delaware
Press.
———. 1992. “Through the Past Darkly: The
Politics and Policies of America’s Drug War.” Pp.
5–41 in Drug Control Policy: Essays in Historical
and Comparative Perspective, ed. William O.
Walker, III. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania
State University Press.
Musto, David F. 1999. The American Disease:
Origins of Narcotics Control. 3rd ed. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Reefer Madness (a.k.a. Tell Your Children) 1938. Dir.
Louis J. Gasnier.
Sloman, Larry. 1998. Reefer Madness: A History of
Marijuana. Introduction by William S. Burroughs.
New York: St. Martin’s Griffin.
Walker, William O., III. Opium and Foreign Policy:
The Anglo-American Search for Order in Asia,
1912–1954. Chapel Hill: The University of North
Carolina Press.

239

E
Encryption
Encryption, which derives from the Greek word
“kriptos,” refers to the concealment of information
through the conversion of plain text into ciphered
or encoded text. So pervasive is this ancient expression of secrecy that encryption might be read as the
physical manifestation of conspiracy in language.
From the court conspiracies of the Middle Ages to
the world of cold war espionage, countless conspiracies and conspiracy theories have been based on
the encoding or decoding of encrypted messages.
The earliest example of encryption can be traced
back to 1,900 B.C. when unconventional hieroglyphics were found on the tomb of Khumhotop II
in the place of more standard inscriptions. While
their intent was not to make the message secret,
but rather to obscure its meaning and thus attract
the attention of passersby, it nevertheless stands as
one of the first known examples of codemaking.
The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana catalogs encryption
(or, “secret writing” and “secret talking”) as the
forty-fourth and forty-fifth of the sixty-four arts,
along with others such as meditation, cooking, and
bookbinding. Other examples include cuneiform
tablets in ancient Mesopotamia and the atbash
cipher of the Old Testament. Yet it was not until
the mid-ninth century that cryptography developed into an actual science. Arab scholars produced influential treatises and studies of the subject, and invented the equally important discipline
of cryptanalysis (the decipherment of encrypted
messages) primarily through methods of frequency

analysis. This legacy can still be identified in the
word “cipher,” which originates from the Arabic
sifr, or “zero.”
One of the earliest and simplest methods of
encryption is the substitution cipher. This system is
credited to Julius Caesar and employs an alphabet
in which plaintext letters are replaced by the third
letter that follows in the alphabet; thus A becomes
D, B become E, and so on. The closely related
transposition method involves the rearrangement
of plaintext letters in a word or a sentence, creating
a kind of anagram. More often, the transposition
method relies on a preestablished key possessed by
both the sender and receiver of the message, such
as a parallel list of plaintext and ciphertext alphabets. Closely allied to encryption, and often used in
conjunction with it, is the practice of steganography (from the Greek word for “covered writing”).
Steganography, which according to Herodotus is at
least as old as 440 B.C., refers to the secret transmission of a message. In classical times this might
mean using invisible inks, such as milk or urine, or
even going as far as tattooing a message on the
head of a slave and allowing his or her hair to grow
back. In modern times, messages have been photographed and reduced to the size of microdots,
electronically embedded in image files, and placed
in plain view on the Internet.
Since its beginnings, encryption has emerged as
one of the fundamental necessities of statecraft. Its
use in political affairs became well established in
the Western world in the seventeenth century when
241

Encryption

black chambers were established by nations across
Europe. The black chambers, such as France’s Cabinet Noir and Vienna’s Geheime Kabinets-Kanzlei,
operated as secret rooms where messages between
diplomats and other government personnel were
intercepted and cryptanalyzed, before proceeding
through the postal service to their addressees. In
France, Cardinal Richelieu recognized the value of
decrypting the messages of foreign powers, and
with the help of Antoine Rossignol (and later his
son, Bonaventure), began developing new methods
of cryptanalysis, even inventing the Great Cipher
(“le chiffre indéchiffrable”) of Louis XIV.
Encryption has proved no less important in the
twentieth century, having had far-reaching effects
in both the Machiavellian intrigues of political life
and in wartime. One of the most famous episodes
in the history of encryption and cryptanalysis
occurred during World War II, in which codebreakers at Bletchley Park, notably Alan Turing,
cracked the German Enigma code by developing
on the work of Polish mathematician Marian
Rejewski. The ability of the Allied forces to decipher all German communications enabled them to
protect shipping lanes, monitor troop movements,
and better coordinate attacks, ending the war far
sooner than if they had been unable to crack the
code. The other famous codebreaking machine to
emerge from the work at Bletchley was Colussus,
which was used to break the German Lorenz
cipher, and later became the forebear of the modern computer.
In recent times, there has been no shortage of
government attempts to control the spread of
strong encryption, particularly after the invention of
Public Key Encryption by Whitfield Diffie. Of particular note is Phil Zimmerman’s public key encryption program PGP (Pretty Good Privacy) which was
posted to a Usenet bulletin board as freeware in
June 1991 and has since spread across the globe.
Zimmerman wrote and released PGP in 1991 in
order to forestall Senate Bill 266, an anticrime bill
that would have forced the manufacturers of communications devices using encryption to install back
doors through which the government could easily
read all correspondence. The distinction of PGP is
242

that it allows individuals with conventional home
computers to send RSA-encrypted messages via email that are effectively impossible for intelligence
organizations to decode. By September 1993, Zimmerman was being investigated by the San José
Office of U.S. customs for the illegal “export” of his
program, a case that was finally dropped. Since the
U.S. Department of State classified encryption
technologies as “munitions,” to be regulated under
the Arms Export Control Tax, Zimmerman was considered an illegal arms exporter.
The eventual furor created by the release of
PGP and the investigation of Zimmerman brought
the issue into public awareness like never before.
On one side, there existed an unlikely union of civil
libertarians, privacy advocates, and big business
(concerned about corporate security and the protection of Internet transactions). On the other side,
the government and security agencies argued that
they would be unable to read the communications
of drug cartels and terrorists, thereby hampering
their investigation and prosecution of criminals.
Various compromises have been proposed by the
U.S. government, such as key escrow, in which all
private encryption keys are held by a neutral third
party and relinquished to law enforcement bodies
in criminal investigations, yet it has not had wide
support and the issue of government controls on
encryption remains largely undecided.
Although strong encryption has in recent years
entered the public domain, the National Security
Agency (NSA) is still largely responsible for its
development and control. The NSA has stood at
the forefront of cryptanalytical science for the last
half century and has played a role in almost every
encryption-related issue since its inception. Established in 1952 by the presidential directive of
Harry S. Truman, the NSA began its life as the
Armed Forces Security Agency (AFSA), eventually
expanding to become larger than the CIA. For
many years, its name did not appear on any governmental documentation and its budget remains a
matter of great secrecy. Though the NSA is in one
sense a modern-day black chamber, it is also the
largest information gathering and cryptanalytical
body history has ever seen, administering the

Eugenics

ECHELON program, employing more mathematicians than any organization in the world, and
cryptanalyzing both domestic and international
communications for use by U.S. intelligence and
law enforcement agencies. There is also some evidence that it has been involved in industrial espionage by passing on information to U.S. companies
in order to win lucrative international contracts.
Unsurprisingly, modern conspiracy theories, novels, and films such as Sneakers (1992), Mercury
Rising (1998), and Enemy of the State (1998) have
cited it, rather than the CIA, as the newly definitive
enemy of the people.
Tony Elias
See also: Central Intelligence Agency; Hackers;
National Security Agency; Venona Project;
Zimmerman Telegram.
References
Kahn, David. [1967] 1996. The Codebreakers: The
Story of Secret Writing. New York: Scribner.
Newton, David E. 1997. Encyclopedia of
Cryptology. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Singh, Simon. 1999. The Code Book. New York:
Doubleday.

Eugenics
Eugenics refers to methods of improving the
hereditary qualities of a race or breed. Some critics
of eugenics have argued that in the hands of a powerful government it would be used to make genetic
alterations to control potential criminal and antisocial behavior.
Eugenics literally means “well-born” and describes
efforts to improve society by breeding better people—by encouraging the reproduction of people with
“good” genes and discouraging those with “bad”
genes. At least fourteen countries, including the
United States, enacted some form of eugenics practice in the early twentieth century.
The practice of eugenics in the first half of the
twentieth century in the United States led to the
compulsory sterilization of 60,000 “feebleminded”
people in thirty-three states, and indeed, compulsory sterilizations continued to be legal in California

until the 1970s. The U.S. Supreme Court case Buck
v. Bell (1927), allowed (in its words) the sterilization
of the feebleminded, insane, criminalistic, epileptic,
inebriate, diseased, blind, deaf, deformed, dependent, orphaned, tramps, homeless, and paupers as a
means of bettering society.
The Eugenics Record Office at Cold Spring Harbor in New York was the headquarters of eugenics
research in the United States from 1910 to 1940.
Here, scientists promoted their racist ideals under
the guise of science, convincing the U.S. Supreme
Court and more than twenty states that their ideas
were valid.
Other organizations involved in the eugenics
movement included the American Breeders Association, the Race Betterment Foundation, and the
American Eugenics Society. Such organizations promoted the myths of genetic causes of a wide range
of psychological and behavioral disorders. Eventually, the Public Health Service and the Surgeon
General aligned with the eugenics movement.
As eugenicists produced their science, universities
including Harvard, Columbia, Cornell, and Brown
offered courses in eugenics. By 1928, approximately
20,000 students were enrolled in almost 400 courses
at universities in the United States. At the same time,
laws were enacted restricting immigration into the
United States, requiring sterilization of the “feebleminded,” and forbidding interracial marriages. Very
wealthy people not only stood behind the validity of
eugenics but also encouraged it. These people
included David Starr Jordan, president of Stanford
University, Mrs. E. H. Harriman, who gave $15,000
to the Eugenics Record Office, and corporate giants
John D. Rockefeller and John Harvey Kellogg. The
Pioneer Fund, a nonprofit grant foundation in New
York, still gives grants to researchers studying potential applications of eugenics.
The science of the eugenics movement was
motivated by social forces. The idea of eugenics
was first used to promote the legitimacy of the ruling class in England in the late 1800s, based on the
notion of Social Darwinism. Sir Francis Galton
posited that the ruling class passed on its leadership qualities to its offspring; thus leadership
stayed in the family. Its most extreme version was
243

Eugenics

promoted by Adolph Hitler in Mein Kampf, and
eugenics became a part of Nazi ideology.
The eugenics movement in the United States
developed at a time of social and economic difficulty. The influx of large numbers of immigrants
into U.S. cities at the beginning of the twentieth
century led to rapid urban and industrial growth,
and increased competition for scarce jobs. The
resulting social problems led to fear of the poor
and the foreign and resulted in attempts to control
these groups. Social ills were blamed on individuals with “bad genes” rather than on the structure of
U.S. capitalistic society.
The study of criminality began with the so-called
Chicago School of Criminology, which emerged
largely as a result of environmental and social conditions, including extensive foreign immigration,
that materialized at the turn of the twentieth century in Chicago. From 1860 to 1910, the city’s population doubled every ten years, and by the turn of
the twentieth century the city’s population was over
2 million inhabitants, largely as a result of immigration from Europe. With new immigrants in an
overcrowded environment, official rates of crime
and disease escalated. Thus, it is not surprising that
efforts to reduce crime and control the population
occurred mostly in these areas.
Eugenicists studied family trees in order to trace
traits that they thought were passed from one generation to the next. Mental tests designed to identify immigrants with bad gene pools at one point
designated more than 75 percent of all Russian and
Polish immigrants as “feebleminded”; few noted
the degree of absurdity in such claims.
Well-known research produced by Richard Dugdale and Henry Goddard seemed to justify the
practice of eugenics. Richard Dugdale was asked in
1874 by the Prison Association in New York to
inspect county jails; as a result, he became
intrigued by the high incidence of kinship among
inmates. He used his own funds to conduct an
extended investigation of one large kin group living
in and around Ulster County, New York, whom he
dubbed the “Jukes.” Dugdale eventually uncovered a family of some 709 descendants of a Dutch
immigrant named Max.
244

In 1875, Dugdale reported his findings to the
Prison Association and eventually wrote “The
Jukes”: A Study in Crime, Pauperism, Disease, and
Heredity. Dugdale located six members of the
“Jukes” family in a county jail and traced the
genealogy of the family back over 200 years. In so
doing, he discovered that a large number of the
family members were poor, ill, and involved in
prostitution and had illegitimate children; these
activities supposedly cost the state of New York
millions of dollars per year.
Criminologists now assert that Dugdale’s study
had a major impact on attitudes about the causes of
crime at the time, even though it was based on
unreliable information and was plagued by value
judgments and unsupported conclusions. Indeed,
many interpret the Jukes study as an effort to convince society that poverty and crime are the
inevitable results of bad stock. In fact, Dugdale was
a public health reformer who wrote in support of
treatment for physiological disorders to cure social
ills, rather than promoting “solutions” such as sterilization or worse. Nevertheless, many used Dugdale’s findings to support a eugenics movement
aimed at improving society through restrictions on
immigration and forced sterilization.
The Kallikak family is a fictitious name given to
another family studied by U.S. psychologist Henry
Goddard. Goddard collected data for a longitudinal
study that would contrast the descendants of one
“upstanding man” and his upstanding Quaker wife
with the descendants of the same man and an illicit
“tavern wench.” Kallikak is a pseudonym that
comes from two Greek words, good (kallos) and bad
(kakos). Goddard assigned this name to the family
to help illustrate the effects of “moronic breeding”
(“moron” was a term used to describe people with a
mental age between eight and twelve years).
Previous to his study of the Kallikaks, Goddard
and his assistants had worked with the staff at Ellis
Island to identify “morons” attempting to immigrate to the United States. Their work at Ellis
Island had supposedly given them sufficient
expertise to classify mental capacity by sight.
Goddard located the descendants of the “upstanding man” and the “tavern wench” (kakos) living in

Executive Intelligence Review

poverty and compared them to the “legitimate”
descendants of the married couple (kallos). As Goddard expected, the results of the study confirmed
that the kakos line were much more likely to be troubled or in trouble than the kallos line. Goddard published the results of his study in The Kallikak Family
(1912), but in fact he had doctored photos of the
kakos line to give the individuals a more depraved
and sinister appearance, for example, by painting
dark circles under the eyes of small children.
The science of eugenics was flawed in many
ways. For example, the methods used to study ethnic and racial variation in various behavioral traits
were poorly defined and difficult to measure. Surveys filled out by professionals working inside
institutions and advocates of the eugenics ideals
contained falsified data and dishonest findings.
Other data were collected from school principals
of children and friends and acquaintances of
adults. Often, the only evidence presented by
eugenicists was anecdotal, drawing conclusions
about entire ethnic and racial groups based on stories about a particular family or individual. Key
concepts of study were poorly and subjectively
defined according to middle-class white standards
that immediately biased findings against some
racial and ethnic groups. The main proposition of
eugenicists, that genes caused a wide range of
behavioral problems in individuals, was illogical
and simplistic. Other larger level factors in society
were ignored as important for understanding
human behavior.
Matthew B. Robinson
References
Dugdale, Richard. 1877. “The Jukes”: A Study in
Crime, Pauperism, and Heredity. Putnam, NY:
Arno.
Goddard, Henry. 1973. The Kallikak Family: A
Study in the Heredity of Feeble-Mindedness. New
York: MacMillan
Kline, Wendy. Building a Better Race: Gender,
Sexuality, and Eugenics from the Turn of the
Century to the Baby Boom. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Smith, J. D. 1985. Minds Made Feeble: The Myth
and Legacy of the Kallikaks. Rockville, MD:
Aspen Publications.

Vankin, Jonathan, and John Whalen. 1999.
“Breeding Better People.” The 70 Greatest
Conspiracies of All Time. Secaucus, NJ: Carol
Publishing.
Vold, George, Thomas Bernard, and Jeffery Snipes.
1998. Theoretical Criminology. 4th ed. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Websites
“Eugenics, or you can’t keep a good idiot down”:
http://www.historyhouse.com.
Image Archive on the American Eugenics
Movement: http://vector.cshl.org/eugenics.

Executive Intelligence Review
Executive Intelligence Review is a weekly newsmagazine published by the Lyndon LaRouche
organization. LaRouche, the magazine’s contributing editor, published articles and “exposés” that
contributed to the development of his conspiracy
theories involving Jewish politicians, international
bankers, the British royal family, and drug dealing.
The editors of the Executive Intelligence Review
also published books and shorter monographs on a
variety of topics by expanding articles originally
published in the magazine.
The magazine emerged out of Lyndon LaRouche’s
1971 plan to develop a worldwide intelligence operation. He proposed that the operation be organized
like a major national news weekly. The New Solidarity International Press Service (NSIPS) was incorporated by three LaRouche followers in 1974. As a
news service, LaRouche’s intelligence operatives
used journalistic cover complete with press passes to
gain access to government officials. Executive Intelligence Review was created as money flowed into the
operations of the NSIPS. During the Ford and
Carter administrations, Executive Intelligence Review
operatives gained White House press accreditation
and participated in a number of presidential press
conferences. The news service also opened bureaus
in capitals around the world. By 1979, Executive
Intelligence Review was producing about $4 billion in
revenue—not surprisingly, since the annual subscription rate was nearly $400.
Many of the articles that appear in Executive
Intelligence Review were expanded into books. One
245

Executive Intelligence Review

of the more famous books was Dope, Inc.: the Book
that Drove Henry Kissinger Crazy (1992). In this
book, the editors exposed what they saw as the real
aims of the United States government’s “war on
drugs.” According to the book, “the kingpins of the
U.S. branch of the drug cartel, led by Henry
Kissinger and the Anti-Defamation League of B’nai
B’rith launched a years-long effort to silence the
authors [of an earlier edition], starting with
LaRouche, who was railroaded to federal prison in
late 1988.” President George H. W. Bush kept
LaRouche in prison, according to the book, because
LaRouche was about to reveal the complicity of the
federal government in the drug trade.
In The Ugly Truth about the ADL, the editors of
Executive Intelligence Review exposed the AntiDefamation League as “one of the most dangerous
organizations in the world.” The book portrays the
ADL as a spy organization supplying intelligence
data to foreign governments. It cites the 1994 San
Francisco spy scandal as an example of the role
played by the ADL in spying on the United States.
At the end of 1993 it was revealed that an ADL operative in San Francisco, Roy Bullock, collected and
traded information in a covert spy network involving
the San Francisco police, some twenty other California police departments, and police departments outside of California. Over thirty years Bullock compiled a huge computerized data bank including files
on close to 1,000 groups and 10,000 individuals. Bullock provided information to the FBI and the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, and sold
information on antiapartheid activists to both South
African agents and the ADL. The Ugly Truth also
linked the ADL to organized crime by connecting
contributions from reputed gangster Meyer Lansky
to the Anti-Defamation League.
Despite the connection to Lyndon LaRouche,
the Executive Intelligence Review received some

246

attention from the mainstream press. In 1988, Nelson Benton, a reporter for the magazine, asked
President Ronald Reagan about the fitness of
Democratic Party nominee Michael Dukakis to be
chief executive of the United States. A rumor had
been circulating for some time that Dukakis twice
underwent psychiatric treatment in the 1970s. President Reagan answered the question, thus allowing
the rumor to gain additional credence. Jeffrey
Steinberg, a senior reporter for Executive Intelligence Review, appeared on British television in
1998 to present the theory that Prince Philip
ordered British intelligence to assassinate Princess
Diana. The latter incident indicated how much the
British royal family was a target of the LaRouche
network. Executive Intelligence Review regularly
reported that Queen Elizabeth ran an international
cocaine smuggling cartel and that Italian banker
Roberto Calvi was murdered by the Duke of Kent.
The Executive Intelligence Review also claimed that
the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing was a first strike
in a British attempt to take over the United States
with the eventual goal of world domination.
John David Rausch, Jr.
See also: Antisemitism; British Royal Family;
Drugs; Kissinger, Henry; LaRouche, Lyndon;
Oklahoma City Bombing.
References
The Editors of Executive Intelligence Review. 1992.
Dope, Inc.: The Book that Drove Henry Kissinger
Crazy. Washington, DC: Executive Intelligence
Review.
The Editors of Executive Intelligence Review. 1992.
The Ugly Truth about the ADL. Washington, DC:
Executive Intelligence Review.
King, Dennis. 1989. Lyndon LaRouche and the New
American Fascism. New York: Doubleday.
Website
Executive Intelligence Review website: http://www.
larouchepub.com.

F
Farrakhan, Louis
Louis Farrakhan is the leader of the Nation of
Islam, an organization he helped reconstitute in
1977. He has been praised by his supporters as an
influential and eloquent leader who has used his
position of authority to foster a stronger sense of
self among African Americans, such as in his organization of the Million Man March in Washington,
D.C. Farrakhan’s detractors, however, have decried
him as a racist who traffics in divisive and antagonistic rhetoric. His espousal of many specific conspiracy theories as well as his tendency to speak
generally of “the enemy” and “ them” has led critics
to label him a purveyor of paranoia.
Born Louis Eugene Walcott in New York City,
Farrakhan was raised in Boston by his mother. He
never knew his father (who died when Farrakhan
was three years old), but his mother was a strong
disciplinarian and devout Episcopalian who had a
strong influence on his life. As a young man, he
went into show business, becoming a well-known
singer, musician, and dancer under the stage name
of “Calypso Gene.” Persuaded by Malcolm X to
attend a speech given by Elijah Muhammad, Farrakhan became a member of the Nation of Islam in
1955. He changed his name first to Louis X, then to
Louis Haleem Abdul Farrakhan in 1965.
Farrakhan rose to prominence in the Nation of
Islam, replacing Malcolm X as leader of the Temple
in New York City after his assassination in 1965.
After the death of the longtime leader of the Nation
of Islam, Elijah Muhammad, in 1975, the leader-

ship of the Black Muslims passed to Muhammad’s
son, Warith Deen Muhammad. The younger
Muhammad soon abandoned many of the tenets of
his father and changed the name of the group several times. Farrakhan led a movement to reestablish
the traditions of Elijah Muhammad, and in 1977, he
became the leader of a reconstituted Nation of
Islam.
Farrakhan’s powerful and often divisive rhetoric
has won him both staunch support and strong animosity in and out of the Black Muslim movement.
After Malcolm X broke with Elijah Muhammad and
the Nation of Islam in 1964, Farrakhan wrote in the
Nation, the newspaper of the Nation of Islam, that
such people were “worthy of death.” The fact that
these words were published shortly before the
assassination of Malcolm X in 1965 fueled speculation that Farrakhan was involved in a conspiracy to
kill his rival.
The nature of the relationship between Farrakhan and Malcolm X has continued to be a source
of controversy. In 1995, Qubilah Shabazz, one of
the daughters of Malcolm X, was arrested on suspicion of plotting Farrakhan’s assassination in retaliation for her father’s murder. The case was suspended, however, and Qubilah was sent to a
psychiatric care center in Texas. Betty Shabazz, the
widow of Malcolm X, reconciled with Farrakhan
and Farrakhan stated that both he and Shabazz
were victims of a “larger conspiracy.”
Farrakhan often uses language and imagery that
suggest he himself is a target of persecution and
247

Federal Bureau of Investigation

conspiracy. He has often hinted that drugs, crack
cocaine in particular, were brought into black communities by the federal government as a way of
destroying them, and that this was in part a
response to his own growing influence during the
1980s.
Farrakhan has been denounced as an antisemite,
largely because of statements in which he has suggested Jews played a dominant role in the slave
trade. He has also suggested that Jews created
AIDS and intentionally infected black children with
it. A number of Farrakhan’s assistants have also
caused controversy by making antisemitic remarks.
He has also been accused of more general racism
toward white people for his adherence to many of
the teachings of Elijah Muhammad that describe
white people as “blue-eyed devils” who have conspired to rob blacks of their rightful place in society.
A firm proponent of race separatism, Farrakhan has
preached the evils of blacks marrying nonblacks
(and whites in particular).
Farrakhan also invokes well-worn images of conspiracy in his rhetoric, including references to
Masonic orders, multinational bankers, and
numerology.
Supporters counter that he is simply carrying on
the call for self-reliance that has been at the heart
of the Black Muslim movement since its inception.
This self-reliance, they argue, necessitates a separation from white culture, but it should not be
equated with racism.
Farrakhan has also been condemned for his role
on the international stage, particularly his trips to
Libya, Syria, and Iraq. For several years, he was
banned from entering Great Britain. Yet Farrakhan
has often turned his condemnation by others into a
political asset, suggesting that he is criticized
because he represents a real threat to the political
and economic systems that still enslave African
Americans. He has often suggested that he is the
subject of numerous assassination plots by those
who fear his message of black empowerment.
In recent years, however, Farrakhan has taken
some steps to broaden his appeal. In 1995, Farrakhan led the organization of the Million Man
March, a gathering of African American men in
248

Washington, D.C., for a “day of atonement.” While
Farrakhan’s involvement caused controversy, even
some of his critics conceded that the march had the
potential to be a catalyst for positive change. Farrakhan also moved the Nation of Islam closer in its
belief systems to traditional Islam, which helped
reconcile him with Warith Mohammad. Although
they still maintained leadership of two separate
groups, Farrakhan and Mohammad announced
their unity at the second International Islamic Conference in Chicago in February 2000.
Ted Remmington
See also: AIDS; African Americans, Cocaine;
Muhammad, Elijah; Nation of Islam.
References
Alexander, Amy, ed. 1999. The Farrakhan Factor:
African-American Writers on Leadership,
Nationhood, and Minister Louis Farrakhan. New
York: Grove Press.
Goldberg, Robert. 2001. Enemies Within: The
Culture of Conspiracy in Modern America. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Singh, Robert. 1997. The Farrakhan Phenomenon.
Race, Reaction, and the Paranoid Style in
American Politics. Georgetown, MD: Georgetown
University Press.
Websites
Anti-Defamation League: “Minister Louis
Farrakhan in His Own Words”: http://www.adl.
org/special_reports/farrakhan_own_words/
farrakhan_own_words.html.
Nation of Islam: http://www.noi.org.

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) is largely
synonymous with two things: its longtime director, J.
Edgar Hoover, and the anticommunist feeling
Hoover shared with the majority of his countrymen
during the early cold war. It would certainly be a
mistake to assert that the FBI was only concerned
with questions of espionage and a self-professed
goal of preventing Communist subversion; primary
among FBI concerns were such activities as bank
robberies, kidnapping, and mail fraud (Schrecker,
207). Nevertheless, after World War II, the agency’s
primary focus centered around its efforts to contain
the spread and influence of communism. Such ac-

Federal Bureau of Investigation

tivity largely defined the organization, and certainly
accounts for much of its notoriety in conspiracy circles. Historians have argued that the FBI was “both
cause and effect, as well as most obvious beneficiary” of U.S. anticommunism (Watters and Gillers,
xiv).
This, however, was not the intention of the FBI’s
designers. The brainchild of Attorney General
Charles Bonaparte, the agency was born out of Progressive Era impulses toward centralization and
efficiency. Responding to the inadequacy of local
authority to address interstate crime, the FBI was
originally charged with combating postal and
antitrust violations, as well as other types of financially related fraud; only later did the agency’s mandate expand to include organized crime targets such
as the Mafia, Prohibition, and the Ku Klux Klan.
Three things happened that were to greatly expand
the power of the FBI, and the first was the ascent
of J. Edgar Hoover to its directorship in 1924.
Hoover radically increased both the scope and professionalism of the FBI—for example, he inherited
an organization with nine field offices; six years
later, there were thirty. He was head of the FBI for
the next forty-eight years, and the organization’s
subsequent history is in large part the biography of
Hoover himself.
Second, the United States passed several pieces
of legislation (including the Eighteenth Amendment, beginning Prohibition) that created interstate
crimes for the FBI to enforce. In particular the
Mann Act, which aimed to combat interstate prostitution trade, and the Dyer Act, which aimed to
curtail car theft, provided arenas and authority for
the FBI to act. Third, during World War I, concerns
over espionage justified the broadening of FBI
activity to unearthing spy networks. After it, the
threat posed by political radicalism set the stage for
the most prominent FBI work of the century: combating communism.
Americans have long viewed radicalism as a
potential threat to the stability and security of their
country; anticommunism was not born in 1945,
merely intensified. Accordingly, the FBI redoubled
its efforts in this area, to combat the threat—real
and perceived—posed by the Soviet Union. The

cold war had military and political aspects; it also
had domestic ones, and the FBI was at the forefront
of these. It led the way among government agencies
concerned about the influences that Communists
inside the United States and the U.S. government
could have. Fear of such insurgency was widespread among Americans, providing fertile ground
for Joseph McCarthy. The era dubbed “McCarthyism” was characterized by a widespread hysteria
throughout U.S. society, wherein many suspected
Communists were hounded from jobs, public life,
and homes for the most tenuous of (purported) radical sympathies. Behind McCarthy’s ability to make
accusations lay the FBI; he and like-minded politicians (many on HUAC, the House of Representatives’ Un-American Activities Committee) would
hardly have been able to establish any credibility
without information supplied by the FBI, and
McCarthy freely admitted that he got the bulk of
his information from the organization (Bayley, 46).
The FBI may have been the silent partner in
McCarthyism, but it was in fact the dominant one.
After Hoover died, revelations about the nature
and extent of the information gathered shocked the
nation. In an essay entitled “Why I Got Out of It,”
a former FBI agent details the myriad ways that the
agents would infiltrate potentially subversive political groups to obtain information on the members
(as part of COINTELPRO, the program of domestic
surveillance and infiltration begun in the 1950s).
He also discusses the selection of targets—a
process done with almost reckless disregard for the
likely level of the threat. Suspicion was often confined to “liberal” groups, and black ones were particularly suspect: “It seemed that every politically
dissident black man was a candidate for investigation” (Watters and Gillers, 378). Under the guise of
investigating potentially subversive groups for dangerous activity, the FBI acted as a political organization, investigating liberal groups with far more
abandon than conservative ones.
These “FBI files,” born out of concern for
alleged conspiracy, have become the center of suspected conspiracies themselves—particularly
among those on the Left who have felt most threatened by the agency. Web searches can draw a raft of
249

Federal Emergency Management Agency

links detailing alleged FBI involvement in conspiracies connected to the Kent State shootings, UFOs,
the Kennedy assassination, the Mafia, and the Martin Luther King assassination among many others.
There is no common thread connecting these
alleged conspiracies, but the mid-1970s revelations
of the FBI’s wiretapping activity has made the
agency a target of conspiracy thinking itself. These
revelations coincided with a declining faith in the
U.S. government after Watergate and the Vietnam
War. Perhaps as a result, the FBI is now perceived
as a wellspring of conspiracies as much as a discoverer of them.
David Hecht
See also: Anticommunism; COINTELPRO; Hoover, J.
Edgar; Kennedy, John F., Assassination of; King,
Martin Luther, Jr., Assassination of; McCarthy,
Joseph.
References
Bayley, Edwin R. 1981. Joe McCarthy and the Press.
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Countryman, Vern. 1973. “The History of the FBI:
Democracy’s Development of a Secret Police,”
Pp. 33–63 in Investigating the FBI, ed. Pat
Watters and Stephen Gillers. Garden City, NY:
Doubleday.
Schrecker, Ellen. 1998. Many Are the Crimes:
McCarthyism in America. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Theoharis, Athan, et al., eds. 1998. The FBI: A
Comprehensive Reference Guide. Phoenix, AZ:
Oryx Press.
Wall, Robert. 1973. “Why I Got Out of It,” Pp.
369–388 in Investigating the FBI, ed. Pat Watters
and Stephen Gillers. Garden City, NY:
Doubleday.
Website
The FBI: http://www.fbi.gov/libref/historic/history/
historymain.htm.

Federal Emergency Management Agency
The Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) is an independent disaster management
agency that reports to the president of the United
States. Although it has been frequently accused of
being involved in conspiratorial activities by those
on the far right of U.S. politics, FEMA’s official role
is “to reduce loss of life and property and protect
250

[America’s] critical infrastructure from all types of
hazards through a comprehensive, risk-based emergency management program of mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery” (FEMA 2002).
This means that FEMA plans for and deals with
problems caused by such natural phenomena as
hurricanes, tornadoes, and earthquakes, as well as
man-made disasters such as chemical spills, nuclear
accidents, and fires. It also has responsibility for
emergencies created by war, terrorism, and other
acts of civil disturbance. The agency has 2,500 fulltime employees, supplemented by over 5,000
standby reservists. FEMA’s headquarters are
located in Washington, D.C., but it maintains
regional and area offices around the country.
Many members of the American Patriot movement in particular, however, do not accept the official version of what FEMA does. For them the
agency is a key part of a global conspiracy to impose
a tyrannical and oppressive New World Order on the
United States. Believers in this conspiracy theory
contend that less than 10 percent of FEMA’s staff are
actually assigned to preparing for and dealing with
natural disasters such as storms and earthquakes; the
rest, it is argued, are involved in formulating plans to
overthrow the Constitution and turn the United
States into a military dictatorship. In 1992 the Liberty Lobby’s newspaper, the Spotlight, reported that
blueprints for this dictatorship could be found in a
top-secret safe in FEMA headquarters.
According to such members of the Patriot movement, FEMA is best understood as a “secret” or
“shadow government” that is waiting to assume control of the United States once a presidential declaration of martial law has been made in response to
either a sufficiently serious genuine national emergency or one that can be convincingly “manufactured.” Examples of such an emergency are said to
include the threat of imminent nuclear war, massive
terrorist attacks, an outbreak of rioting occurring in
several U.S. cities simultaneously, a series of natural
disasters affecting a large section of the U.S. population, or a major environmental disaster. Martial law
having been declared, FEMA’s extensive emergency
powers will then come into operation. Patriot groups
argue that FEMA, acting under these powers, will be

Federal Emergency Management Agency

able to ignore all existing laws, move entire populations at will, arrest and detain citizens without a warrant and hold them without trial, seize property and
food supplies, and even suspend the Constitution
itself. For the Militia of Montana, in such circumstances the “American people and all their belongings become chattel of FEMA, and the United
Nations Peace Keeping Forces will be in absolute
control of our country” (Militia of Montana).
Led by Gerald “Jack” McLamb, a retired police
officer from Phoenix, Arizona, the Patriot organization Police Against the New World Order (PANWO)
has further contended that the Los Angeles riots of
1992 were carefully planned by FEMA as a test to
see how Americans would react to the imposition of
martial law. According to PANWO the test worked
out much better than New World Order “social
planners” had expected. This was because very few
citizens complained about the presence of army personnel on their city streets in the mistaken belief
that they were there simply to restore order. FEMA
personnel are also said to fly many of the unmarked
“black helicopters” operating around the United
States in preparation for a United Nations takeover
of the country; to be engaged in the construction of
concentration camps for the imprisonment of U.S.
dissidents; to be implicated in the abductions undertaken by visiting UFOs; and to be operating a secretive state-of-the-art monitoring installation in a hamburger processing plant in Salt Lake City where over
800 telephone numbers are monitored, with particular attention being given to companies engaged in
the sale of guns and ammunition.
In 1998 the idea that FEMA allowed the White
House to suspend constitutional government following a declaration of martial law was given widespread public exposure when it was expressed by
one of the leading characters in The X-Files movie,
Dr. Kurtzweil (Martin Landau). The movie also
made the case that FEMA was one of the principal
agencies involved in covering up the alien genesis
and human extermination project, a theme that had
been a mainstay of the “mythology” aspect of the
long-running television show of the same name.
FEMA responded by suggesting that viewing its
activities as part of a global conspiracy to hide the

presence of aliens from the U.S. population was to
seriously confuse the “true mission” of the agency
(FEMA 1998).
FEMA was created under executive order by
President Jimmy Carter in 1979. At this time it took
over the activities of various other agencies such as
the Federal Insurance Administration, the Federal
Disaster Assistance Administration, and the National
Weather Service Community Preparedness Program. Civil defense responsibilities were also transferred to the new agency from the Defense Department’s Defense Civil Preparedness Agency. Some of
the major disasters and emergencies FEMA has
been involved in since its creation include the accident at the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant in
Pennsylvania in 1979, the Loma Prieta earthquake in
California in 1989, Hurricane Andrew in 1992, and
the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995. The “true mission” of FEMA was brought into renewed focus by
the September 11 al-Qaida terrorist attacks on the
United States in 2001. Under its director Joe M. Allbaugh, and in conjunction with the newly created
Office of Homeland Security, FEMA was given new
responsibilities for dealing with issues of national
preparedness and homeland security in the wake of
the attacks. This included training and equipping
what FEMA calls “the nation’s first responders” in
how to deal with weapons of mass destruction
(FEMA 2002).
D. J. Mulloy
See also: Liberty Lobby; New World Order; The
Spotlight; UFOs; The X-Files.
References
Cooper, William Milton. 1991. Behold a Pale Horse.
Sedona, AZ: Light Technology Publishing.
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
http://www.fema.gov.
———. 1998. “What’s in a Name? For FEMA,
Less—and More—than Movie Suggests.” http://
www. fema.government/reg-viii/1998/r8_n003.
htm.
———. 2002. “History of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.” http://www.fema.gov/
about/history.htm.
Frager, Dr. Richard X. 1997. “FEMA and UFOs: A
Definite Connection.” http://www.conspiracynet.com/archives/articles/conspiracy/nwo/
CNCib012.txt. 7 March.

251

Federal Reserve System

Keith, Jim. 1994. Black Helicopters over America:
Strikeforce for the New World Order. Lilburn,
GA: IllumiNet Press.
Militia of Montana. n.d. “Executive Orders for the
New World Order: What You Should Know.”
Noxon, MT: MOM.
Police Against the New World Order. 1992.
Operation Vampire Killer 2000. Phoenix, AZ:
PANWO.
The Present Truth Ministry. 1995. “President’s
Emergency Powers Created FEMA.” The Patriot
Report 4 (February).
Stern, Kenneth S. 1997. A Force upon the Plain: The
American Militia Movement and the Politics of
Hate. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
The X-Files Movie. 1998. Dir. Rob Bowman.

Federal Reserve System
It was a conspiracy theorists’ dream come true: a
group of wealthy bankers, supported by academics
and politicians, skulking off to a secluded island to
concoct a complete transformation of the U.S.
banking system. The meeting in November 1910 on
Jekyll Island, Georgia, which established the blueprint for the Federal Reserve System, played to
long-held Populist fears of “Eastern Money Interests,” Jews, and large banks. When the plan was
presented to Congress, it effectively increased the
authority of the federal government—at least, indirectly—over the nation’s banking system.
Ever since concerns about “foreign interests” in
the First and Second Banks of the United States,
some Americans had viewed banks suspiciously.
Writers such as William Gouge and politicians such
as Thomas Hart “Old Bullion” Benton advocated a
metallic standard of gold and silver coin only. These
“hard money” proponents supported Andrew Jackson’s “war” on the Bank of the United States and distrusted all forms of paper money. Although “hard
money” advocates were in the minority in most
states, they appealed to farmers and laborers who
distrusted moneyed elites. After the Civil War, ironically, this same distrust evidenced itself in a demand
for paper money (“Greenbackism”) and/or for
coinage of silver, a position best associated with
William Jennings Bryan.
252

By the late 1800s, however, although most Americans were satisfied with the nature of the banking
system, they realized that important weaknesses
existed. The banking system was not sufficiently
“elastic,” meaning that it could not expand or contract the money supply when economic conditions
changed. Another concern for those familiar with
the financial sector was that in several panics—1873,
1893, and 1907—a single banker, J. P. Morgan, had
stepped in with a consortium of bankers to rescue
the system. After the 1907 panic, even Morgan
admitted that any future bank runs might be beyond
his ability to contain.
A series of commissions and studies by the American Bankers Association and the federal government produced a number of recommendations,
most notably the need for a central bank and
nationwide interstate branch banking. (Many states
did not permit intrastate branch banking, and interstate branch banking was viewed as illegal, although
no express challenges to interstate banking had
occurred.) Virtually all of these studies concluded
that any reforms in the banking system would
require a powerful national bank capable of acting
as a “lender of last resort” and tasked with providing liquidity to the banking system as a whole to
allow for greater “elasticity.”
An unstated, but widely held, goal of many of the
reformers was also to limit or reduce the power of
the New York banks, such as National City Bank,
J. P. Morgan, and Kuhn, Loeb, and Company. Despite the fact that Morgan himself and most of the
officers of National City were Protestants, a widely
held suspicion existed in the rural United States
that the New York banks were dominated by Jews.
(The presence of Paul Warburg of Kuhn, Loeb
among the Jekyll Island group of “conspirators”
reinforced the fear of “powerful New York Jews.”)
Whether many Americans indeed feared a Jewish
element in the “money power” or not, a popular
conception was that banks in New York wielded
inordinate power. Thus, the reformers’ plans also
involved different strategies for minimizing the
influence of the New York banks.
By 1913, the United States had what is termed a
“dual banking” system consisting of state-chartered

Federal Reserve System

banks (which could not issue money), and national
banks, chartered by the federal government, which
could issue banknotes. The comptroller of the currency had authority over all national banks, while
state authorities (bank examiners and such) supervised the state banks. There was no central bank or
“lender of last resort,” or any national source of
credit expansion.
Following J. P. Morgan’s formation of a consortium of banks to bail out the banking system during
the panic of 1907, concerns arose over the “consolidation” of banking power, especially in New York.
Congressman Arsene Pujo’s House Banking and
Currency Committee, which convened in 1911, investigated Morgan and First National’s George F.
Baker, and concluded that New York banks controlled far more financial assets than they actually
owned through various investments, interlocking
directorates, and trust companies. New York, Pujo
claimed, controlled 43 percent of the money in the
United States.
When the Jekyll Island meeting took place, all of
these concerns played upon the reforms to which
the participants agreed. The central individuals who
drafted the basis of the Federal Reserve Bank system were Senator Nelson Aldrich (head of the
National Monetary Commission); Henry P. Davison
of J. P. Morgan; Charles D. Norton of First National
Bank; Paul Warburg of Kuhn, Loeb; and Colonel
Edward House (one of President Woodrow Wilson’s
closest advisors). Not only was this a small group,
but conspiracy-minded people could point to the
fact that Warburg was Jewish, or that House had
connections to London banks and that he had written a futuristic novel Philip Dru, Administrator, a
story in which Marxist socialism triumphed. Worse,
the meeting took place in secret. Aldrich, especially,
was concerned that if a plan was not drafted in
secret, “special interest” lobbyists would nitpick it to
death.
Aldrich’s presence convinced some that John D.
Rockefeller was manipulating the meeting. Morgan, according to one conspiracy view, was a “Rockefeller stooge”—an astonishing claim about one of
the richest men in the world. Morgan controlled
the Fed bill through Aldrich, his “floor broker in the

Senate” (Allen, 45). Rockefeller then used the Fed,
according to this view, to “bankroll” the Bolshevik
Revolution in Russia, manipulate stock prices
through inflation, and push the agenda of the
Council on Foreign Relations (CFR) and Trilateral
Commission in later years.
There is no question among historians that the
Jekyll Island meeting resulted in the essence of the
Federal Reserve Act, introduced by Congressman
Carter Glass of Virginia, chairman of the House
Committee on Banking. Far from being drafted in
secrecy, the Federal Reserve Act was debated extensively and was subjected to much compromise
before being passed overwhelmingly by the House
(298 to 60) and the Senate (43 to 25). Under the act,
twelve Federal Reserve District Banks were established in different regions across the United States.
Each of these banks was a corporation owned by the
member banks in its district, and while all national
banks had to be members, state banks were not
required to join the Federal Reserve System. Member banks had to place 6 percent of their capital and
surplus in the district bank. One of the significant
factors of the act was the location of the district
banks: New York, of course, had one, as did Philadelphia and Boston. But Minneapolis, Dallas, San Francisco, Chicago, Atlanta, Cleveland, and Richmond
all had district banks, and the state of Missouri—the
heart of the Midwest—had two (St. Louis and
Kansas City). Clearly, Congress had gone out of its
way to dilute the “money power” of New York.
Any district bank could act to stop runs by providing emergency cash from its vaults, and in theory, if one entire district was in trouble, other districts would come to its aid. The “elasticity”
problem was addressed through the Fed’s manipulation of discount rates to lend money to member
banks to either expand, or contract, credit.
In reality, though, New York retained its power
through its overall influence, its dominant leadership, and its connections to corporate America.
Congress intended that a Federal Reserve Board of
Governors should be instituted, made up of five
members appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate, as well as the comptroller and
the secretary of the Treasury. The Banking Act of
253

Federal Reserve System

Federal Reserve Bank entrance. (ChromoSohm/Corbis)

1935 changed this by moving key decisions to the
Federal Open Market Committee, composed of
seven members of the Board of Governors and five
of the twelve district bank presidents, including the
New York president.
The Federal Reserve Act was established on the
assumption that the nation’s money supply would
remain tied to gold, and thus its open-market activities were always balanced with an eye toward the
gold stockpiles. When the stock market crashed in
1929, many contended that the Federal Reserve had
encouraged the stock market “boom” by providing
“easy credit.” Subsequent research has shown that if
anything the Fed failed to expand the money supply
in proportion to the rapid growth in the industrial
sector, and that a slow but destructive deflation had
occurred. After 1930, the Federal Reserve engaged
in a deliberate massive credit contraction that
helped plunge the nation into the Great Depression,
still under the assumption that the Great Bull Market had resulted from “loose money.” The contraction also ensued, however, because as other nations
254

left the gold standard, and as the gold backing of
U.S. banks eroded, depositors withdrew funds at an
alarming rate. President Franklin Roosevelt took the
United States off the gold standard, stabilizing the
banks. But his prohibition of individual gold ownership in 1934 was viewed as part of the conspiracy to
place all financial power in the hands of the Federal
Reserve System.
The entire gold standard controversy pits a number of conspiracy theories against one another. For
example, if the Bank of England sought control over
the U.S. economy, it might have attempted to
weaken the economy by leaving the gold standard.
With the United States left as the only nation in the
world whose currency was still tied to gold, U.S. gold
reserves would have flooded out, and U.S. banks
would have collapsed—as nearly happened. On the
other hand, the solution, and the path taken by
Franklin Roosevelt, was to secure the banking system’s gold asset base by prohibiting individual gold
ownership, except for jewelers and dentists. Yet this
is viewed by other conspiracy theorists as evidence

Film and Conspiracy Theory

of Roosevelt’s plan to centralize the economy and
make citizens dependent on worthless paper money.
In fact, only a perfectly coordinated international
conspiracy, assisted by the deliberate actions of totalitarian states that hated each other—Germany and
the Soviet Union—could have possibly manipulated
such events. Not only would the Bank of England
and the Federal Reserve System have needed to
operate in unison, but so would the Bank of France,
the Reichsbank, and virtually every other central
bank in the world, all coordinating vastly different
command-and-control structures, governance systems, and national goals. Over these conspiracies,
one can stretch yet another layer, namely that of
“international Jewry,” which was manipulating economic developments to its own ends, some in concert with, and some antithetical to scenarios involving the British or a Roosevelt dictatorship.
Since World War II, some have been convinced
that the Federal Reserve’s open-market activities
were designed to ensure that those presidents
favored by the Fed maintained their office, and
those who displeased the Fed lost theirs. Despite
the Fed’s supposed independent status, many argue
that it has conveniently lowered rates to support the
economy of leaders to whom it was favorably disposed. Yet one of the most despised presidents of
modern times, Bill Clinton (whom conspiracists
have accused of being a “Trilateralist and Bilderberger”), witnessed multiple interest-rate hikes by
the Fed during his two-term presidency. Thus,
either he had no control over the Fed, or the Fed
was working in direct opposition to the ends of the
Trilateral Commission, the Council on Foreign
Relations, and the Bilderberger group.
In the post–World War II era, the Bretton Woods
agreement pegged foreign currencies to the dollar,
and although the dollar was legally required to be
convertible into gold, it was nevertheless pegged to
gold in price. That system collapsed in 1968 after
consistent federal budget deficits made it impossible
for the dollar to hold its value. After that, the world’s
currencies entered a more competitive era in which
they “floated,” or competed, against each other.
A more consistent criticism of the Federal Reserve
is that it has virtually eliminated gold and silver

coinage, supposedly in violation of the Constitution.
With all paper money in the control of the federal
government, the economy would be at the mercy of
either the White House or the Fed, and individuals
would become slaves to “fiat money.” For more than
two decades after the Great Depression, the prohibition against holding gold remained in place, but in
the early 1970s, the government once again allowed
individuals to buy and sell gold coins. Although the
value of Canadian Maple Leafs and other popular
gold coins fluctuated wildly with the price hikes in oil
emanating from OPEC, in the 1980s the Fed’s antiinflation policies nearly eliminated any premium on
gold. For the next twenty years, gold hovered steadily
at historically low prices, causing consternation
among those who pointed to gold as a key indicator
of government-generated inflation.
If anything, the Fed has consistently lost control of
the banking system and seen its influence over the
economy weakened. The appearance of electronic
funds transfers and high-speed satellite transmissions
made information on financial markets available anywhere in the world, instantaneously. No government
could hide weaknesses in its monetary or fiscal policy
for more than a few hours. Meanwhile, the speed of
banking transactions brought the United States—
and the world—increasingly closer to competitive
money, if not in actual paper form, at least in electronic form and in credit/debit card substitutes.
Larry Schweikart
See also: Gold Standard.
References
Allen, Gary. 1971. None Dare Call It Conspiracy.
Rossmoor, CA: Concord Press.
Bryant, Ralph C. 1983. Controlling Money: The
Federal Reserve and Its Critics. Washington, DC:
The Brookings Institution.
Gilmour, Richard A. 1984. America’s Unknown
Enemy: Beyond Conspiracy. Great Barrington,
MA: American Institute for Economic Research.

Film and Conspiracy Theory
Films that center on or significantly include a conspiracy have been around as long as most other genres of fiction films. To take one notorious early
255

Film and Conspiracy Theory

example, The Birth of a Nation (dir. D. W. Griffith
1915) portrays the original Ku Klux Klan (KKK),
positively, as a conspiracy by Southern whites to
overturn gains made by African Americans during
the post–Civil War Reconstruction. Generally,
though, traditional “secret societies” such as the
KKK have appeared in films only sporadically. (Two
recent examples are the organization based on Yale
University’s Skull and Bones society in The Skulls
[dir. Rob Cohen 2000], and the legendary Illuminati
in Lara Croft: Tomb Raider [dir. Simon West 2001].)
As in many conspiracy theories, conspiracies in films
tend to be amorphous. And as with all genres of
popular film, conspiracy movies follow cycles that
vary with changing trends in the wider culture (Altman). There have been three major cycles: from the
late 1940s to the mid-1960s during the cold war,
from the early 1970s to the mid-1980s in the postVietnam, post-Watergate era, and from the early
1990s to the present.
The Cold War and the “International
Communist Conspiracy”
The first important cycle of conspiracy films begins
in the late 1940s with the start of the cold war and
concern over the so-called international Communist
conspiracy. Some of these films follow the efforts of
federal agents to combat Communist spy rings and
fifth columns, such as I Was a Communist for the
FBI (dir. Gordon Douglas 1951); the similarly
premised TV series I Led Three Lives (1953–
1956), scripts for which were vetted in advance by
the FBI; Walk East on Beacon (dir. Alfred Werker
1952); and the perfectly ludicrous Big Jim McClain
(dir. Edward Ludwig 1952), featuring western stars
John Wayne and James Arness as agents of the
House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC)
foiling a Soviet plot to take control of Hawaiian ports
by infiltrating waterfront labor unions. Another
group of Communist conspiracy films concerns the
protagonists’ discovery that people close to them are
secretly Communists: a woman’s husband in Conspirator (dir. Arthur Hornblow 1949) and I Married
a Communist (a.k.a. Woman on Pier 13) (dir. Robert
Stevenson 1950); a war veteran’s girlfriend in The
Red Menace (dir. R. G. Springsteen 1949); a couple’s
256

son in My Son John (dir. Leo McCarey 1952); and a
man’s coworkers in The Fearmakers (dir. Jacques
Tourneur 1958). These and dozens more along the
same lines, none of them successful at the box office,
were probably released to allay suspicions about the
patriotism of people in the film industry (Leab, 26)
at a time when it was widely alleged that Hollywood
had been infiltrated by clandestine subversives, and
many film workers, especially writers, were blacklisted by the studios and some (the “Hollywood 10”)
were even jailed by the government. Unsurprisingly,
no real effort to understand the Communists and
their aims is made in these “red” conspiracy films,
except to suggest that they are motivated by greed,
hunger for power, and so on. A pastiche with a clever
twist is The House on Carroll Street (dir. Peter Yates
1988), written by Walter Bernstein, who had himself
been put on the blacklist, about a leftist writer persecuted for refusing to cooperate with the HUAC
who teams up with an FBI agent to uncover a government conspiracy to smuggle Nazi war criminals
into the United States to aid in the cold war. Blacklisted screenwriters feature in The Front (dir. Martin Ritt 1976), also scripted by Bernstein, and in The
Majestic (dir. Frank Darabont 2001).
The classic Communist conspiracy film The Manchurian Candidate (dir. John Frankenheimer 1962)
was released at a time when relations with the Communist bloc were already beginning to move toward
détente and the fear of communist subversion
within the United States had greatly diminished. In
consequence, films began openly critiquing cold war
paranoia, as in Seven Days in May (dir. John
Frankenheimer 1964), in which opposition to U.S.Soviet nuclear disarmament inspires a plot to overthrow the government and install a military regime.
(The generals’ coup concept was more recently, and
prophetically, recycled in The Siege [dir. Edward
Zwick 1998], in which a terrorist campaign by Arab
fundamentalists in New York provides the military
an excuse to impose martial law.) By the late 1960s,
international conspiracy paranoia had become spoof
material in The President’s Analyst (dir. Theodore J.
Flicker 1967) and in James Bond movies. Subsequent “straight” cold war conspiracy suspense films
usually seem like throwbacks to a distant past,

Film and Conspiracy Theory

although a few are quite well made, such as Telefon
(dir. Don Siegel 1977), with its Soviet agents preprogrammed to blow up military installations, and
The Package (dir. Andrew Davis 1989), in which
rogue U.S. and Soviet spies conspire to undermine
progress toward peace.
Alien Invasions and Body Snatchers
Three excellent alien invasion films from the early
cold war period, Invaders from Mars (dir. William
Cameron Menzies 1953), It Came from Outer Space
(dir. Jack Arnold 1953)—in which, however, it turns
out that the intruders are not invading but only want
to repair their spaceship—and Invasion of the Body
Snatchers (dir. Don Siegel 1956), along with less
memorable knockoffs like The Brain Eaters (dir.
Bruno VeSota 1958) and Invisible Invaders (dir.
Edward L. Cahn 1959), are often regarded as commentary on the Communist witch-hunting hysteria
of the time. They were freer to criticize or even
ridicule this anticommunism owing to their fantastic
plot lines, involving ordinary people whose identities
are “taken over” by extraterrestrials in a conspiracy
to wrest control of the earth from humans. Siegel’s
film in particular lends itself to complementary
interpretations as both a metaphoric, perhaps even
satiric exaggeration of the internal Communist menace and as a critique of the rigid conformity to traditional “American values” that was seen as a sign of
loyalty (Bartholomew, 374). Also worth mentioning
in this context is the archly titled Red Planet Mars
(dir. Harry Horner 1952), which, before descending
into vacuous spiritualism, flirts with the intriguing
idea of the Soviets faking an alien contact in order to
destabilize the West.
The body-snatching concept—whether the aliens
appropriate real people’s bodies or disguise themselves to resemble humans—reappears not only in
two remakes of Siegel’s film, Invasion of the Body
Snatchers (dir. Philip Kaufman 1978) and Body
Snatchers (dir. Abel Ferrara 1993), and in more or
less direct imitations such as two TV series, The
Invaders (1967–1968) and Dark Skies (1996–1997),
the miniseries V (dir. Kenneth Johnson 1983), and
The Puppet Masters (dir. Stuart Orme 1994), and
the made-for-TV Target Earth (dir. Philip Markle

1998), but also in several other films, in each case
with a different angle in keeping with the changing
zeitgeist. The Stepford Wives (dir. Bryan Forbes
1975) echoes—or perhaps the word should be confirms—feminist critiques of the patriarchal nuclear
family in a “male fantasy” about men in a small town
turning their wives into docile automatons, “living
dolls” (Borzello, Kuhn, Pack, and Wedd, 14). The
1990s resurgence of environmental activism is
reflected in The Arrival (dir. David Twohy 1996)
when aliens from a hot planet who have assumed
human identities plot to replace us by hastening the
global warming that we instigated. Young “slackers”
are targeted for takeover by aliens who have bodysnatched their teachers in The Faculty (dir. Robert
Rodriguez 1998), and in Disturbing Behavior (dir.
David Nutter 1998) a similar contingent from Generation X is mind-controlled through brain implants
administered by a mad scientist in collusion with the
teenagers’ own parents. Late-twentieth-century anxiety about illegal immigrants is humorously played
upon in Men in Black (dir. Barry Sonnenfeld 1997)
(Dean, 155), in which an ultrasecret agency polices
extraterrestrial “aliens” who have been living on
earth for decades in the guise of humans, domesticated animals, and even celebrities such as Newt
Gingrich, Dennis Rodman, and Sylvester Stallone.
(Elvis too, but he has since returned to his home
planet.)
The Post-Vietnam, Post-Watergate Era
Given the cinematic obsolescence of the international Communist conspiracy, the next significant
cycle of conspiracy films, which begins in the early
1970s, can be attributed to a variety of causes,
domestic and international, cultural and commercial. First, the assassinations, ghetto rebellions, and
other upheavals of the 1960s had left a legacy of disappointed hopes, cynicism, and pessimism, which
was further augmented by the lightless tunnel that
was the war in Vietnam. Then, as the new decade
wore on, there were additional blows to national
self-confidence: Watergate and other political scandals, the energy crisis and resulting recession, the
ignominious fall of Saigon, and the Iran hostage crisis. The early to mid-1970s also saw a downturn in
257

Film and Conspiracy Theory

movie attendance, leading the studios, uncharacteristically, to take chances. One result was the “Hollywood renaissance” sparked by the emergence of
“movie brats” (young, sophisticated directors like
Martin Scorsese and Francis Ford Coppola) who
were given unprecedented freedom to pursue their
visions, and another was an opportunity for African
Americans to make films for the major studios in
the so-called blaxploitation boom. Hollywood’s unaccustomed risk-taking, combined with the mood of
the times, also helped make it possible to bring
forth a slew of darkly antiestablishment films
involving evil conspiracies, often perpetrated by
forces within the government. Fredric Jameson
perceptively characterizes these films as “an unconscious, collective effort at trying to figure out where
we are . . . in a late twentieth century whose abominations are heightened by their concealment and
their bureaucratic impersonality” (Jameson, 3).
Governmental, Corporate,
and Police Conspiracies
A few of the films are directly inspired by the political assassinations of the 1960s. Executive Action
(dir. David Miller 1973) anticipates Oliver Stone’s
JFK (1991) in dramatizing a conspiracy theory of
the Kennedy assassination, while Winter Kills (dir.
William Richert 1979, reedited 1983) is about the
cover-up of a conspiracy in the assassination of a fictional president, and more recently the made-forTV First Target (dir. Armand Mastroianni 2000)
also concerns a presidential assassination conspiracy. The Parallax View (dir. Alan J. Pakula 1974),
which follows a reporter’s investigation of a shadowy corporation that carries out assassinations, is
more representative of the decade’s pessimistic new
trend as Jameson describes it. A similar aura of sinister hidden power pervades the conspiratorial
Nixon White House in Pakula’s All the President’s
Men (1976). The president’s paranoid personality is
explored in Secret Honor (a.k.a. Lords of Treason)
(dir. Robert Altman 1984) and Nixon (dir. Oliver
Stone 1995); the intelligence community in Three
Days of the Condor (dir. Sydney Pollack 1975), The
Killer Elite (dir. Sam Peckinpah 1975), and The
Osterman Weekend (dir. Sam Peckinpah 1983); and
258

the nuclear power industry in The China Syndrome
(dir. James Bridges 1979) and Silkwood (dir. Mike
Nichols 1983), in which a brave woman dies while
trying to expose practices that could lead to environmental disaster. (Although both stories are
based on fact, it is in keeping with their respective
timeframes that in Erin Brockovich [dir. Steven
Soderbergh 2000] another female whistle-blower is
successful in exposing a corporate conspiracy to
cover up an environmental disaster. By contrast, in
the barely coherent Chain Reaction [dir. Andrew
Davis 1996], the conspiracy, which is connected to
the CIA, rather than causing or covering up an environmental disaster, seeks to prevent the development of an environmental panacea: a cheap, nonpolluting energy source.)
In more recent reworkings of this dark motif, the
tobacco industry is in collusion with a major television network to hide the truth about nicotine addiction in The Insider (dir. Michael Mann 1999); the
United Nations is the locus of a murky plot (in both
senses) to sabotage a global free-trade agreement in
The Art of War (dir. Christian Duguay 2000); a
Microsoft-like software company secretively but
ruthlessly pursues worldwide domination of electronic communications in AntiTrust (dir. Peter
Howitt 2001); and in the conspiracy film parody
Zoolander (dir. Ben Stiller 2001) the clothing industry maintains a healthy profit margin by washing the
unimposing brains of male fashion models until
they become supporters of child labor and
Manchurian Candidate–like assassins of would-be
reformers. (The Insider also inspired an ingenious
antismoking public service short designed to resemble a trailer for a fictitious conspiracy film.) There
should also be mentioned in this context three films
from African American filmmakers that concern
deep-rooted racist conspiracies in law enforcement.
In Deep Cover (dir. Bill Duke 1992) an undercover
black policeman discovers that his Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) handlers are permitting corrupt Latin American governments to saturate his own community with hard drugs, while in
both The Glass Shield (dir. Charles Burnett 1995)
and the made-for-cable Gang in Blue (dir. Mario
van Peebles and Melvin van Peebles 1996), other

Film and Conspiracy Theory

young black officers uncover white vigilante organizations within the police force. In view of the widespread currency of similar conspiracy theories,
regarding, for instance, the origin of AIDS/HIV, in
African American culture (Turner), which some call
“black paranoia,” it is strange, perhaps suspiciously
so, that there have not been many more such films.

viewers’ brainwaves. Carpenter’s idea about hidden
commercials is echoed in the teenpic Josie and the
Pussycats (dir. Harry Elfont and Deborah Kaplan
2001), as the music industry inserts subliminal messages in pop tunes in order to further, in the words
of the film’s title character, a “conspiracy to brainwash the youth of America.”

Surveillance and Control
In keeping with Watergate-era revelations of secret
tape recordings and government surveillance
regimes, high technology in such areas as media
manipulation, advanced weaponry, and above all surveillance quickly became a prominent fixture in conspiracy films. A sound surveillance specialist unwittingly becomes an accomplice to a murderous
conspiracy in The Conversation (dir. Francis Ford
Coppola 1974), and another soundman accidentally
discovers a politically motivated conspiracy in Blow
Out (dir. Brian De Palma 1981), while a high-tech
helicopter with a secret agenda of surveillance and
crowd control is at the center of Blue Thunder (dir.
John Badham 1983). NASA conspires to deceive the
public with a faked Mars mission in Capricorn One
(dir. Peter Hyams 1978), and in Alien (dir. Ridley
Scott 1979) a faceless organization called “The Company” with vast, apparently quasi-governmental
powers surreptitiously arranges for the crew of a
deep-space mining ship to sacrifice themselves in
retrieving a lethal life form for development as a
weapon. Similarly, and in anticipation of The X-Files,
politicians plot to keep secret a captured UFO in
Hangar 18 (dir. James L. Conway 1980). Two additional science fiction films of the 1980s anticipate
another conspiracy trend of the 1990s, of surveillance and media manipulation becoming almost literally ubiquitous: in Videodrome (dir. David Cronenberg 1983), television signals exert strange
powers over viewers, while aliens disguised as
humans keep the population under constant surveillance and control through nonstop subliminal advertising in They Live (dir. John Carpenter 1988). A
more recent variation on Cronenberg’s idea about
mind-destroying video signals occurs in Batman Forever (dir. Joel Schumacher 1995), in which The Riddler distributes a set-top box in order to assimilate

The Contemporary Period
Several significant trends of the 1990s show little
sign of abating in the new century. First, the number of films (and TV programs) with a conspiracy
angle has grown enormously. Second, the nature of
film conspiracies has moved beyond the normal
channels of politics, whether traditionally left or
right, cold war international or Watergate domestic.
Now film conspiracies are not only vast in size
and/or in power and could be unfolding anywhere
at any time, but the participants, rather than individuals implementing perfidious but intelligible
left- or right-wing schemes, seem to have no goals
except expanding the conspiracy. Moreover, the
conspirators seem to be discrete individuals in
appearance only but in fact are part of a seamless
whole, in some films even to the extent of having a
collective mind, like the Borg in Star Trek: First
Contact (dir. Jonathan Frakes 1996). Finally, rather
than merely projecting an illusion of innocuous normality in order to mask its subversive reality, the
new-style conspiracy so pervades every facet of existence, from the universal to the singular, as to cast
doubt on the reality/illusion distinction itself.
Observers are divided on how to explain these
developments. Jonathan Romney, interestingly,
sees the trend as a consequence of new cinema
technology such as CGI (computer graphics imaging), which has disrupted the relationship between
what we are actually seeing (computer simulations)
and what we think we are seeing (physical objects
that have been photographed), instilling a paranoia
that is more epistemological or even existential than
political. “The new paranoia movies,” he writes,
“have less to do with political anxieties, more to do
with the feeling that there is little verifiable reality
in the screen image itself and, by extension, in the
world we know through visual media” (Romney,
259

Film and Conspiracy Theory

39). Other commentators adopt a more analytical
approach. Mark Fenster follows Fredric Jameson in
attributing it to an unthought-out but justified discontent with the status quo among the general population, while Peter Knight argues that globalization has made conspiracy theory less a political
position than a “default mode” of experiencing culture in the New World Order, and Timothy Melley
points to what he calls “agency panic,” which he
describes as “a feeling that individuals cannot effect
meaningful social action, and, in extreme cases, may
not be able to control their behavior” (Melley, 11).
Unquestionably, whatever the specific cause of the
increased preoccupation with conspiracy, it is fed by
the realization that more and more aspects of daily
life, and not only in the popular culture, are being
subsumed into regimes of manipulation, surveillance, and control, for no obvious reason, unless
merely as an end in itself (Garfinkel, Rushkoff).
Obscurity and Inscrutability
A rogue intelligence group that not even its enemies
can identify exerts mind control to program assassins
and even uses the space shuttle to cause earthquakes
in Conspiracy Theory (dir. Richard Donner 1997).
The film’s protagonist, a taxi driver who is also a conspiracy theorist, conceives of the entire world as
dominated by two “opposing factions” that “at some
levels [are] at war but at other levels [are] the same.”
He learns that the extent to which he is under constant surveillance exceeds his wildest paranoid nightmares, which is a common experience in these films.
In The End of Violence (dir. Wim Wenders 1997) the
government (or some unspecified part of it) seeks to
suppress street crime by secretly installing satellitecoordinated hidden cameras in all public places, and
in Enemy of the State (dir. Tony Scott 1998) a similar but even more omnipresent surveillance regime
has been instituted by the National Security Agency
(NSA), apparently to no purpose other than for the
sake of having it. (The story is premised on covering
up the murder of a congressman who opposes a
Telecommunications Security and Privacy Act that
would give the NSA greater power to violate the latter in the name of the former. Such is their electronic reach that they wipe out all traces of the hero’s
260

identity, as had happened to the heroine in an earlier
film, The Net [dir. Irwin Winkler 1995]). There is a
similar obscurity or even inscrutability about the
plotters’ true goals in a spate of White House coverup films that all appeared in 1997, inspired perhaps
by the cumulative effect of years of pre–Monica
Lewinsky Clinton rumors: Shadow Conspiracy (dir.
George P. Cosmatos), Absolute Power (dir. Clint
Eastwood), Murder at 1600 (dir. Dwight Little), and
the best of the lot, the brilliant satire Wag the Dog
(dir. Barry Levinson), in which a war is manufactured in order to divert attention from sex allegations
concerning the president and an underage girl.
Antiestablishment Conspiracies:
Beyond “Left” and “Right”
In several films the source of the conspiracy is found
not in the establishment or some part of it, but
comes from the opposition to the establishment. The
nature of the conspiracy is nevertheless the same: it
is usually vast, has sweeping but (at best) only
vaguely defined goals, and can operate anywhere at
any time, with everyone potentially a secret adherent
of it. In political terms, these antiestablishment conspiracies resist ascription to traditional categories
like right- and left-wing. The all male and almost all
white members of the aptly named Project Mayhem
conspiracy in Fight Club (dir. David Fincher 1999)
seek to blow up corporate buildings, but not so much
to subvert capitalism as to restore their masculinity,
which they believe they have forfeited in the empty
consumerism of modern life. Threatening a police
commissioner with (appropriately enough) castration for trying to shut down the “fight clubs” from
which he recruits volunteers, their charismatic
leader boasts that “we know everything about
you . . . We control every part of your life.”
Going one better than The Parallax View’s Joseph
Frady, who was blamed for the political assassination he died trying to prevent, Michael Faraday in
Arlington Road (dir. Mark Pellington 1999) unwittingly delivers the explosives that blow up the FBI
building, for which he also takes the blame posthumously, rather than the antigovernment conspirators, who appear to be ordinary middle-class suburbanites with no interest in politics of any kind.

Film and Conspiracy Theory

Similarly opposed to the status quo is the eponymous conspiracy in Twelve Monkeys (dir. Terry
Gilliam 1995), which plans to return the planet to
the animals, a goal that is accomplished by releasing
a plague virus that affects only humans.
Epidemics, Medical Experiments,
and the Unexplainable
The epidemic motif has featured in other conspiracy
films, notably The Andromeda Strain (dir. Robert
Wise 1971) and Outbreak (dir. Wolfgang Petersen
1995), in both of which scientists are co-opted by the
military into developing as weapons new disease
organisms, from outer space in the former film and
from Africa in the latter. (The cold war era film The
Satan Bug [dir. John Sturges 1965] also has a secret
government lab experimenting with deadly microorganisms, one of which is stolen for use in an extortion plot.) Sometimes the government experiments
on people directly, but without their knowledge, to
alter them in desired ways. This happens during the
Vietnam War to the protagonists of both Jacob’s
Ladder (dir. Adrian Lyne 1990) and the Roger
Corman-produced The Capitol Conspiracy (a.k.a.
The Prophet) (dir. Fred Olen Ray 1999). In the former the purpose is to enhance soldiers’ will to fight
and in the latter to endow orphaned children with
extrasensory powers. Paranormal children are also
created by the government in the miniseries Sole
Survivor (dir. Mikael Salomon 2000), while a conspiracy of mutant teenagers to take over the world is
opposed by pro-human mutants in X-Men (dir.
Bryan Singer 2000), and a conspiracy to use massproduced human clones to do the same features in
The 6th Day (dir. Roger Spottiswoode 2000).
In four eerie films from the mid-1990s, so little is
revealed about what seems like a conspiracy that it
is left uncertain whether there even is one. In Safe
(dir. Todd Haynes 1995) and The Trigger Effect (dir.
David Koepp 1996), something in the environment
causes mysterious allergic reactions in the former
film and a general breakdown of the entire social
fabric in the latter. The prisoners in Cube (dir. Vincenzo Natali 1997) are unacquainted with each
other and have no idea who imprisoned them or
why, while the mathematician protagonist of Pi:

Faith in Chaos (dir. Darren Aronofsky 1997) finds
himself pursued by stockbrokers and Orthodox
Jews because he may possess a secret that no one
can begin to explain rationally. These are so-called
independent films and their quirkiness might be
dismissed as typical of “indies,” but in the late 1990s
conspiracy films more in the mainstream displayed
comparable characteristics.
Conspiracies of Infinite Regress
As billionaire Nicholas Van Orton learns in The
Game (dir. David Fincher 1997), the employees of
Consumer Recreation Services (CRS) could be anyone and everyone he might encounter, and therefore what he takes to be the real world populated by
real people could be just that, but then again it
might also be an elaborate fiction engineered as a
birthday present from his brother for making his
life more exhilarating; or as a scheme for stealing
his money in which his brother may or may not be
complicit; or as a benign plot to help him overcome
the childhood trauma of his father’s suicide; or as a
malign plot to induce him into following in his
father’s footsteps (i.e., off a roof); or as something
the film cagily refuses to reveal, inasmuch as the
ending leaves open the possibility that the “game” is
still being played, or even that there has never been
a time when it wasn’t. In other words, the real
world/game world distinction is in an infinite
regress that doesn’t need to be sustained by resorting to more obvious devices like “virtual reality”
(VR)—although the VR concept can be intelligently
exploited, as in The Thirteenth Floor (dir. Josef Rusnak 1999), in which the solution to a murder in
“our” world must be sought in a VR world inhabited
by virtual “people” whose motivations, despite their
preprogramming, are ultimately as indeterminable
as those of the CRS employees in The Game.
The Truman Show, Dark
City, and The Matrix
Three important conspiracy films from the last
years of the last century add a further twist. Not
only is the conspiracy vast, beyond politics and existential in its implications, but all of us are made to
feel a part of it, actually or potentially.
261

Film and Conspiracy Theory

Truman Burbank in The Truman Show (dir. Peter
Weir 1998) lives in an artificial world, but for him,
and for him alone, there is no other world, because
everyone except him is complicit in a conspiracy to
sustain his belief that his world is the only one. This
is because the town in which he has been raised
since birth and subtly prevented ever escaping from
is really a giant television studio equipped with
countless hidden cameras and microphones, and all
the people he has ever known whether intimately or
casually are, unknown to him, actors in the employ
of a director with the sacrilegious name of Christof.
At the same time, everyone in the world Truman
has never met is a voyeur of his life as Christof
arranges it to unfold in his round-the-clock TV
show, the popularity of which implies acceptance of
the ever-increasing surveillance and control in their
own daily lives on the part of the television audience and, by extension, of the film’s audience. As
Christof says of Truman, he “prefers his cell.”
In Dark City (dir. Alex Proyas 1998) another artificial world has been created in space and populated with kidnapped humans by a dying race of
aliens, the Strangers, who possess “the ability to
alter physical reality by will alone,” as explained in
the opening voice-over narration from Daniel Paul
Schreber, a psychiatrist ironically named after a
turn-of-the-last-century paranoid whose delusions
were studied by Sigmund Freud. Every night, while
the Strangers are altering physical reality, Schreber
rearranges the entire population’s memories so that
the aliens can experiment on them. One human,
Murdoch, discovers that he has the same powers.
But after defeating the Strangers he simply takes
their place, instituting a regime that, although presumably more benign, is no less total in its control
over the malleable populace.
So total and all enveloping is the conspiracy in The
Matrix (dir. Andy Wachowski and Larry Wachowski
1999) that it has a name that evokes the womb. In
the far future renegade computers have imprisoned
most of the human race in pods in order to harvest
their bodies’ electrical energy, while keeping them
pacified with the cybernetically induced illusion that
they are in 1999 New York. As Agent Smith puts it
(he is part of a special program that hunts down
262

members of the human resistance who have escaped
their pods and reentered the VR environment of the
Matrix to carry out sabotage), in their own minds
they are merely “billions of people just living out
their lives, oblivious.” But unfortunately for them (or
so it would seem), the contentment they experience
in their “prison that you cannot smell or taste or
touch,” as the rebel leader Morpheus describes the
Matrix, is so great that “they will fight to protect it.”
This means that, in order to prevail, Morpheus’s
people, who of course also constitute a conspiracy,
would need to destroy all those oblivious billions.
Freedom versus Security?
In these films, ordinary people’s acceptance of and
complicity in a conspiracy against their own autonomy, their privacy, their individuality and even their
existence leave a depressing aftertaste despite saccharine romantic endings. Perhaps the message is
one of resignation: the emerging regime of surveillance and control is inexorably eroding what
remains of our freedom, and many of us, if not all,
are resigned to accept this, and, perhaps in hope of
greater security as a trade-off, even to embrace it.
Ken Harris
See also: AIDS; African Americans;
Anticommunism; Area 51; Central Intelligence
Agency; Clinton, Bill and Hillary; Cold War; Drugs;
Hollywood Ten; House Un-American Activities
Committee; Illuminati; Ku Klux Klan; The
Manchurian Candidate; National Security Agency;
New World Order; Nixon, Richard; Pakula, Alan J.;
Patriarchy; Skull and Bones Society; Stone, Oliver;
Subliminal Advertising; UFOs; United Nations;
Watergate; The X-Files.
References
Altman, Rick. 1999. Film/Genre. London: British
Film Institute.
Bartholomew, David. 1994. “Science Fiction Films.”
Pp. 369–385 in The Political Companion to
American Film, ed. Gary Crowdus. Chicago, IL:
Lake View Press.
Borzello, Frances, Annette Kuhn, Jill Pack, and
Cassandra Wedd. 1985. “Living Dolls and ‘Real
Women.’” Pp. 9–18 in The Power of the Image:
Essays on Representation and Sexuality, ed.
Annette Kuhn. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.

Fluoridation

Dean, Jodi. 1998. Aliens in America: Conspiracy
Cultures from Outerspace to Cyberspace. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.
Fenster, Mark. 1999. Conspiracy Theories: Secrecy
and Power in American Culture. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Garfinkel, Simson. 2000. Database Nation: The
Death of Privacy in the 21st Century. Sebastopol,
CA: O’Reilly.
Hutchings, Peter. 1999. “Satan Bugs in the Hot
Zone: Microbial Pathogens as Alien Invaders.”
Pp. 11–13 in Alien Identities: Exploring
Differences in Film and Fiction, ed. Deborah
Cartmell, I. Q. Hunter, Heidi Kate, and Imelda
Whelehan. London: Pluto Press.
Jameson, Fredric. 1992. The Geopolitical Aesthetic:
Cinema and Space in the World System.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Knight, Peter. 2000. Conspiracy Culture: From the
Kennedy Assassination to The X-Files. London
and New York: Routledge.
Leab, Daniel J. 1994. “Anti-Communist Films.” Pp.
26–31 in The Political Companion to American
Film, ed. Gary Crowdus. Chicago, IL: Lake View
Press.
McLarty, Lianne. 1999. “Alien/Nation: Invasions,
Abductions, and the Politics of Identity.” Pp.
345–359 in Mythologies of Violence in
Postmodern Media, ed. Christopher Sharret.
Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press.
Melley, Timothy. 2000. Empire of Conspiracy: The
Culture of Paranoia in Postwar America. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.
Newman, Kim. 2000. Apocalypse Movies: End of the
World Cinema. New York: St. Martin’s Griffin.
Pratt, Ray. 2001. Projecting Paranoia: Conspiratorial
Visions in American Film. Lawrence: University
Press of Kansas.
Romney, Jonathan. “The New Paranoia: Games
Pixels Play.” Film Comment 34 (6): 39–43.
Rushkoff, Douglas. 1999. Coercion: Why We Listen
to What They Say. New York: Riverhead Books.
Turner, Patricia A. 1993. I Heard It through the
Grapevine: Rumor in African-American Culture.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

Fluoridation
Fluoridation, the addition of fluoride to drinking
water to prevent tooth decay, has been associated
with numerous conspiracy theories beginning in the
1950s when it was first promoted nationally as a

public health measure. Throughout the fifty years
that fluoridation has been controversial in the
United States, the antifluoridation movement has
been receptive to conspiracy theories because the
basic premise of the movement has been that there
is sufficient scientific evidence to prove that fluoridation is either dangerous or ineffective, and that
the promoters of fluoridation know this. Blaming
the promotion of fluoridation on a conspiracy has
been one way antifluoridationists have tried to
explain efforts to promote fluoridation despite their
evidence. As part of their theories, opponents of
fluoridation also often rejected the official version
of how fluoridation was discovered. According to
promoters of fluoridation, a dentist in Colorado discovered that excess fluoride in drinking water discolored teeth. When the United States Public
Health Service (USPHS) attempted to confirm his
observations, they discovered that low levels of fluoride did not cause discoloration but in fact inhibited tooth decay. Even when antifluoridationists
accepted this version of history, to support their
theories they cited the role that alleged conspirators, such as the federal government, played in the
discovery. Although antifluoridationists shared similar views about the dangers of fluoride and questioned its origins, they disagreed on who was
responsible for the promotion of fluoridation, and
their motivation for promoting it.
In the 1950s, during the McCarthy era, some
antifluoridationists believed that fluoridation was
part of a Communist plot to destroy the United
States. All of these antifluoridationists rejected the
official history of fluoridation’s discovery, but disagreed over how fluoridation was actually discovered. Some believed the Nazis in 1930s Germany
had discovered that fluoridation made those drinking it docile and easily controlled. The Nazis had
allegedly used it in concentration camps and to stifle
opposition in their campaigns against Poland and
Czechoslovakia. Other antifluoridationists claimed
fluoridation caused sterility, and was used by the
Nazis in Eastern Europe as part of their plan to
eliminate local populations and replace them with
German settlers. According to this theory, Soviet scientists learned about the uses of fluoridation either
263

Fluoridation

through meetings with the German General Staff
during the brief period of time between the signing
of the Nazi-Soviet nonaggression pact of 1939 and
the German invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941 or
when the Soviet army overran Eastern Europe in
the final days of World War II. Some antifluoridationists did not speculate on the origins of fluoridation, but focused on how the Soviet Union had used
fluoridation in its prisoner-of-war camps and gulags
during World War II to keep their prisoners docile.
As proof that the Soviet Union had used fluoridation
during World War II, these antifluoridationists cited
the memoirs of a soldier who claimed that during
the war he witnessed numerous lend-lease shipments of fluorides to the Soviet Union for the purpose of controlling prisoners.
Antifluoridationists who believed the promotion
of fluoridation was a Communist plot considered
three possible motives. Some believed that fluoridation would weaken Americans’ mental abilities and
their will to resist communism, preparing the way
for a political takeover of the United States. Others
believed that fluoridation was the first step toward a
military invasion of the United States. Communist
saboteurs would slip into water-treatment plants in
key cities and military bases across the country and
use the fluoridation equipment to dump a lethal
dose of fluoride into the drinking water, paving the
way for a Soviet invasion. Another version of this
theory held that fluoridation would cause cancers
and other diseases, particularly in children, so that
in ten or twenty years, when the Soviet Union
attacked, the United States would not have enough
healthy men to raise an army for national defense.
Some antifluoridationists suggested that the ultimate goal of fluoridation was not simply the
destruction of the United States, but the poisoning
of all human beings in preparation for their replacement by a new kind of human being specially bred
by the Soviets.
Antifluoridationists who believed fluoridation was
a Communist conspiracy were never a very large
segment of the antifluoridation movement, although
they were extremely vocal. They reflected the general atmosphere of the 1950s, when many Americans worried that the federal government and soci264

ety had been infiltrated by Communist agents and
were concerned about the possibility of military conflict with the Soviet Union. As those concerns lessened in the late 1950s and early 1960s, antifluoridationists believing in these conspiracies diminished in
importance in the movement, although profluoridationists continued to stress their views as a way of
discrediting all antifluoridationists. Antifluoridationists who believed in a Communist conspiracy came
to be seen as humorous and absurd, not only among
profluoridationists, but also in the broader society.
The best example of this image can be seen in the
black comedy Dr Strangelove, or How I Learned to
Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb (dir. Stanley
Kubrick, 1964), a movie in which a madcap U.S.
general initiates a nuclear war because he believes
that the Soviet Union is poisoning the United States
through fluoridation.
After the Communist conspiracy faded away, two
other conspiracy theories gained prominence
within the movement: one claiming the promotion
of fluoridation was a conspiracy by businesses interests; the other identifying the federal government
as the force behind the conspiracy. Each of these
groups was identified as the source of the money to
fund scientific research favorable to fluoridation
and finance campaigns encouraging communities to
adopt fluoridation. Sometimes these two groups,
business interests and the federal government,
were considered to be working together in the conspiracy.
For some antifluoridationists who blamed the
promotion of fluoridation on business interests, the
primary conspirator behind the promotion of fluoridation was the aluminum industry, particularly the
biggest corporation in the industry, the Aluminum
Company of America (ALCOA). ALCOA was promoting fluoridation as a way to dispose profitably of
the fluoride compounds that were a waste product
of the aluminum manufacturing process. As proof of
this conspiracy, antifluoridationists noted that an
ALCOA chemist had assisted the Colorado dentist
in some of his water tests leading to the discovery of
fluoride. They also believed it was not a coincidence
that Oscar Ewing, head of the government agency
responsible for initiating the promotion of fluorida-

Ford, Henry

tion in the 1950s, had previously been a high-level
lawyer for ALCOA.
In the 1960s and 1970s, when environmental
issues became a concern in the United States, some
antifluoridationists argued that ALCOA was using
fluoridation not only as a disposal method, but also
as a way of undermining environmentalists’ efforts
to stop industrial pollution. These antifluoridationists reasoned that if ALCOA could win widespread
acceptance of the idea that fluoride in drinking
water was safe, it could argue that there was nothing wrong with the company releasing those compounds from its factories into the environment.
Other antifluoridationists expanded the conspiracy
to include all businesses that generated fluoride
compounds as part of the manufacturing process,
from glass- and brickmakers, to weapons manufacturers. As proof of these theories, antifluoridationists stressed the minor role the Mellon Institute, a
business-financed research institute, played in early
tests on fluoridation.
For others, the force behind the promotion of
fluoridation was the sugar industry, which wanted
to find an easy way to prevent tooth decay so that it
could encourage consumption of sugar. Sometimes,
the entire processed food industry was considered
part of this conspiracy. Antifluoridationists argued
that the safe and effective method of preventing
tooth decay was the elimination of processed foods,
especially refined sugar and flour, from the diet.
These industries, by backing the use of fluoridation,
were seeking to prevent tooth decay through a dangerous and ineffective method that would allow
Americans to continue to consume their products.
These antifluoridationists rarely offered any proof
to support their allegations, although they sometimes mentioned the Mellon Institute’s role in
fluoridation research as evidence of these views.
The federal government was also considered
involved in a plot to force fluoridation on the U.S.
public. Within the federal government, the USPHS
was the agency primarily responsible for promoting
fluoridation; antifluoridationists claimed this
agency was only backing fluoridation as a way to
extend federal authority. These antifluoridationists
argued that once the federal government won pub-

lic acceptance of treating tooth decay through
chemicals in the water supply, the next step would
be birth control or psychiatric medication administered to the entire population through the public
drinking water, or forcing exercise and diet regimes
on the entire population to control obesity. Another
explanation for the USPHS’s continued promotion
of fluoridation was that the USPHS was involved in
a cover-up; the USPHS promoted fluoridation
because it could not admit that its scientists, when
they determined that fluoridation was safe, had
committed a mistake that may have endangered the
health of millions of Americans.
Gretchen Ann Reilly
See also: Red Scare.
References
Caldwell, Gladys, and Philip E. Zanfagna. 1974.
Fluoridation and Truth Decay. Reseda, CA: TopEcol Press.
Courtney, Phoebe. 1971. How Dangerous Is
Fluoridation? New Orleans, LA: Free Men
Speak, Inc.
Gotzsche, Anne-Lise. 1975. The Fluoride Question:
Panacea or Poison? Briarcliff Manor, NY: Stein
and Day.
U.S. House. 1954. Committee on Interstate and
Foreign Commerce. Hearings on H.R. 2341, A
Bill to Protect the Public Health from the Dangers
of Fluorination of Water. 83rd Cong., 2d sess.
25–27 May. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.

Ford, Henry
In addition to being the foremost U.S. industrialist
of the early twentieth century, Henry Ford, founder
of the Ford Motor company, was also one of America’s more vocal antisemitic conspiracy theorists.
During the years following World War I, when he
was no doubt one of the most powerful and influential men in the world, Ford oversaw the publication
of numerous antisemitic articles in the widely read
journal that was seen as the public forum for his personal philosophy, the Dearborn Independent.
The 91 articles total 992 pages in the collected
edition Ford published beginning in 1920, The
International Jew: The World’s Foremost Problem.
265

Ford, Henry

Henry Ford, 1863–1947. (Library of Congress)

With titles such as “How the Jews in the U.S. Conceal Their Strength” and “The Scope of Jewish Dictatorship in the U.S.,” the articles claim Jewish
involvement in every aspect of U.S. life, from banking to baseball. The standard attacks on Hollywood
and Wall Street as centers of Jewish power are
included, but less obvious targets come under
scrutiny as well, and it seems difficult to understand
how jazz, for instance, was interpreted as a tool of
266

the Jewish conspiracy (“Jewish Jazz Becomes Our
National Music”). The International Jew also introduced Americans to Protocols of the Elders of Zion,
and in many editions of that infamous antisemitic
forgery, Henry Ford’s own approving comments
occupy a central place in the preface. Norman
Cohn, perhaps the leading foremost expert on Protocols argues that “all in all The International Jew
probably did more than any other work to make the
Protocols world-famous” (159).
Between the Dearborn Independent’s circulation
of around 500,000 and The International Jew’s massive print runs, Ford’s views had a great impact on
the United States of the 1920s. In a society that had
been disrupted by World War I and was beginning
to be split by labor movements, Ford’s claims that
the war had been fought on orders from Jewish
bankers and that unions were merely a “front” for
the Jewish conspiracy had significant political implications. Ford, ever the populist, could never believe
that the true working man believed in the unions
and opposed certain aspects of Ford’s industrial
ideology, so he was sure that “working men are the
tools of some manipulator who seeks his own ends
through them” (Lee, 62). That is, the force of the
Jewish conspiracy, this time in the guise of Bolshevism, lay behind the various movements toward
unionization and labor reform. Faced with what he
saw as an intensification of Jewish subterfuge, Ford
increased his opposition to supposed conspiracy.
He began forcing all of his car dealers to distribute
the Dearborn Independent (although some quit
their relations with Ford over the issue). Then, in
an attempt to dig up hard evidence of the international Jewish cabal, Ford employed an army of private detectives whom he ordered to investigate
prominent Jews. The detectives even investigated
non-Jews whose beliefs lay to the left of Ford’s
rightist populism (including three presidents—
Hoover, Taft, and Wilson), suspecting them of
being nothing more than Jewish fronts. These tactics did not meet with universal approval, to say the
least, but since Ford and his followers saw the press
as yet another front for the Jewish cabal, the more
the mainstream press ridiculed Ford’s ideas, the
more evidence Ford saw of conspiracy.

Foster, Vince

Meanwhile, Ford’s ideas were finding a receptive
audience overseas. Translated as The Eternal Jew,
the Dearborn Independent articles took Germany
by storm. Ford’s biography became an instant bestseller, and Nazis questioned at Nuremberg were
later to emphasize Ford’s influence on their own
developing antisemitism. Hitler had a life-sized picture of Ford next to his desk, and would refer to the
U.S. automobile magnate as his “inspiration.” Ford
is the only American mentioned in Mein Kampf,
and some argue that Hitler went so far as to paraphrase many passages from the Dearborn Independent in his work. Many suggest that Ford may even
have directly funded Hitler, as Hitler himself is said
to have said this in private (though he denied it
publicly). Some also charge that Ford financed the
publication and distribution of The International
Jew in Europe. Whether these charges are true or
not, many consider Hitler’s “intellectual” indebtedness to Ford proof enough of Ford’s indirect implication in the Nazi conspiracy to carry out the “final
solution.”
Ford was later to apologize publicly for the articles published in the Dearborn Independent and
The International Jew in a retraction published in
every major U.S. newspaper. While Ford claimed to
have no knowledge of what the Dearborn Independent contained, most saw through this statement.
New York papers doubted his professions of innocence, and Hitler’s circle was convinced that the
retraction had been written under duress, with
Ford finally submitting to the power of the international Jews.
Even after Ford’s retraction there seemed to be
indirect evidence that he was covertly propagating
the idea of the international Jewish conspiracy.
Union leaders made formal complaints that foremen
at Ford’s plants were distributing antisemitic propaganda to workers, attempting to cut down union
membership by linking it to the Jewish-Communist
plot. There were strong suspicions that certain highranking employees of Ford’s European divisions
were Nazis. Then, on Ford’s birthday in July 1933,
Hitler sent his best wishes along with “The Grand
Cross of the German Eagle”; this highest of honors
had been bestowed on only four other men, one of

whom was Benito Mussolini. In spite of public pressure to refuse the honor, Ford accepted. Ultimately,
Ford opposed Hitler and Mussolini during the war,
but even in this final turn there was an element of
his old conspiracy theory, for Ford came to believe
that even Hitler and Mussolini were mere puppets
whose strings were pulled by a secret, insidious
force.
Marlon Kuzmick
See also: Antisemitism; Gold Standard; Protocols of
the Elders of Zion.
References
Cohn, Norman. 1981. Warrant for Genocide: The
Myth of the Jewish World-Conspiracy and the
“Protocols of the Elders of Zion.” Chico, CA:
Scholars Press.
The International Jew: The World’s Foremost
Problem. 1920–1922. Vols. 1–4. Dearborn, MI.:
The Dearborn Publishing Co.
Lee, Albert. 1980. Henry Ford and the Jews. New
York: Stein and Day.

Foster, Vince
In total, there have been three law enforcement
investigations and two U.S. congressional inquiries
into the 1993 death of Deputy White House Counsel, and close friend of the Clintons, Vincent W. Foster, Jr. All of the reports and inquiries have reached
the same conclusion: Vince Foster committed suicide in Fort Marcy Park. Upon initial review, the
reports and inquiries appear to be straightforward,
with few problems to be discussed. However, some
inconsistencies have led many conspiracy theorists
to suggest Foster was murdered, presumably to prevent him from revealing secrets about one or both of
the Clintons.
The Official Account
According to the official version of events, after six
months in Washington, the stress and pressure had
caused Foster to become depressed. On Tuesday
afternoon, 20 July 1993, at approximately 1:00 P.M.
Foster left his White House office and drove to
Fort Marcy Park, located in the Virginia suburbs
approximately 6.5 miles from downtown Washington. Foster’s car was later seen at the Fort Marcy
267

Foster, Vince

Park parking lot at approximately 4:30 P.M. Thus,
sometime between 1:20 P.M. and 4:30 P.M. Foster
arrived at the park, walked to an isolated location,
sat down on a steep berm, placed his 38.-caliber
revolver into his mouth, and killed himself.
At 5:45 P.M. a man, only identified in the Fiske
Report as Confidential Witness (CW), in a white
utility van informed two park service works that he
had discovered a dead body in Fort Marcy Park.
The park service workers called both the Fairfax
County, Virginia, emergency number as well as the
U.S. Park Police.
At approximately 6:10 P.M. Fairfax Fire and Rescue units and one Park Police officer arrived at Fort
Marcy Park. There were only two cars in the small
parking lot, one of which had Arkansas license
plates. Because of the lack of specifics from the 911
call, the seven emergency workers split up to conduct their search. Within minutes the rescue workers found the body resting on the berm, face up,
with the head near the crest of the berm. Fort
Marcy Park, which was originally used as an “earthwork fortification” (Starr, 11) during the Civil War,
contains two Civil War cannons (Ruddy).
U.S. Park Police Officer Fornshill radioed police
headquarters at 6:15 P.M. stating that a body was
found and that it appeared to be a suicide. Investigators arrived at the park and took Polaroid photos
as well as one roll of 35mm film of the body and
death scene. The Polaroid photos were mainly
close-ups of the body. A Park Police investigator
eventually searched the car with Arkansas license
plates and found White House identification revealing the body to be Vincent Foster, Jr. Sometime
between 7:30 and 8:30 P.M. the White House was
notified of Foster’s death. The medical examiner
arrived at Fort Marcy Park at 7:40 P.M. and by 8:17
P.M. an ambulance had transported Foster’s body to
the morgue. By 8:45 P.M. Park Police investigators
had cleared the death scene and eventually arrived
at Foster’s home at 10:00 P.M.
On 21 July, the deputy medical examiner of
Northern Virginia conducted an autopsy on Foster,
who was then buried in Hope, Arkansas, on 23 July.
Six days after Foster’s body was found, Associate
White House Counsel Stephen Neuwirth, while
268

packing Foster’s personal items from his office,
found a torn-up note in the bottom of Foster’s briefcase. White House personnel believe that the note
is in Foster’s handwriting. The note, though not
signed, identifies the travel office scandal (in which
the Clintons were accused of firing staff in the
White House Travel Office in order to install political allies) and the editorials naming Foster in the
Wall Street Journal as being the major source of his
depression (Fiske).
On 10 August, the chief of the Park Police held a
news conference where he stated that based on the
death scene, the autopsy findings, and the investigation, it was clear that Vince Foster committed suicide in Fort Marcy Park on 20 July 1993.
Contradictions and Problems
One of the major contradictions in this account is
the location and condition of Foster’s body and
clothing. The police report places Foster’s body
near the front of cannon #2, which is in the northwest corner of the park. The berm surrounding this
cannon is low vegetation and mostly bare dirt. Of
the two cannons, cannon #2 is the farthest from the
parking lot, approximately 800 feet. The police
report also indicates that Park Police Officer Fornshill was the first to locate the body (Ruddy). The
crime lab examination of Foster’s clothing showed it
was clean of all soil and dirt, as were his shoes.
Lead paramedic George Gonzalez from Fairfax
County’s Fire and Rescue has stated he was the first
to discover Foster’s body, not Officer Fornshill.
Gonzales also states that the body was in heavy/tall
vegetation and was near, but not in front of, cannon
#1. Gonzales also has stated that the body was laid
out perfectly straight, not contorted or bent in any
way. Conspiracy theorists have also pointed out the
dirt-free conditions of Foster’s clothing and shoes.
If Foster had walked across a dirt pathway and then
lain down on a dirt-covered berm it would be
impossible for his clothes and shoes to be dirt free.
However, if Foster’s body was by cannon #1, in the
heavy vegetation, this could have prevented any
direct contact with dust and dirt.
The photos raise other issues with the investigation. One account indicates that over forty Polaroid

Freemasonry

photos were taken; yet only thirteen are listed in the
official report. Also, the one roll of 35mm film did
not produce any usable photos (Ruddy). The
Polaroid of Foster’s right hand holding the revolver
shows some vegetation, which is much more consistent with cannon #1 than cannon #2, as the police
report states.
Nine months after Foster’s death the FBI conducted a metal detector search around cannon #2.
They found dozens of bullets but were not able to
find the bullet from Foster’s gun. The FBI also
found blonde human hairs as well as carpet fibers
on Foster’s clothes. The FBI never gave an explanation as to the origin of either the hairs or fibers,
which has led to speculation that Foster was murdered elsewhere and then transported to Fort
Marcy Park.
The assertion that Foster still had the gun in his
hand has also raised doubts about the suicide. The
gun was reported to be hanging off Foster’s right
thumb, as seen in the police photo. Thus, Foster
must have gripped the gun with both hands, in a sort
of cupping action, placed his right thumb on the
trigger, placed the barrel in his mouth, and pulled
the trigger. Then, after the fatal shot, Foster’s arms
would have fallen to his side, with the gun hanging
on his thumb. The questions raised by this account
assert that the cupping action would have placed
Foster’s fingers over the cylinder of the revolver,
making the rotating action impossible, and leaving
fingerprints; the FBI did not find any fingerprints
on the gun. In addition, this was a very awkward way
to hold a gun, even during a suicide (Kellett). CW,
who found the body, has stated repeatedly that he
did not see a gun in Foster’s hand.
Another major contention is the note found in
Foster’s briefcase six days after his death. The briefcase had been searched by White House staff in the
presence of both Park Police and the FBI two days
after Foster’s death. During this initial search the
torn-up note was not found. After finding the note,
White House staff not only reassembled the twentyseven pieces using clear tape, but also did not immediately notify the police or the FBI. The note also
did not have a date or a signature, nor were any fingerprints found on it. The FBI finally authenticated

the note as Foster’s handwriting, but by using only
one comparison sample (Ruddy).
The action of the White House staff along with
some questionable police work has led many conspiracy theorists to believe Foster was murdered.
However, if Foster did not commit suicide then this
was one of the largest multiagency conspiracies and
cover-ups in the history of the United States. The
U.S. Park Police, the FBI, two independent counsels, White House staff, and the Fairfax County
Medical examiner would all have had to agree to
assist with the cover-up and this list does not include
the conspirators in the actual murder.
Kenneth L. Mullen
See also: Clinton, Bill and Hillary; Clinton Body
Count; Scaife, Richard Mellon.
References
Fiske, B., Jr. 1994. Fiske Report—Report of the
Independent Counsel In Re Vincent W. Foster, Jr.
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Kellett, Michael. 1995. The Murder of Vince Foster.
Columbia, MD: CLS Publishers.
Ruddy, Christopher. 1997. The Strange Death of
Vincent Foster: An Investigation. New York: The
Free Press.
Starr, Kenneth W. 1997. Starr Report—Report of the
Independent Counsel In Re Vincent W. Foster, Jr.
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Vankin, Jonathan, and John Whalen. 1998. The 70
Greatest Conspiracies of all Time. Secaucus, NJ:
Citadel Press.

Freemasonry
Claims about the Freemasons’ far-reaching influence
and subversive aims have played a part in some of
America’s most enduring conspiracy theories. The
Order of Free and Accepted Masons, an all-male fraternal organization, has had chapters on the North
American continent since the 1730s, and has featured
prominently in U.S. conspiracy thinking since the late
eighteenth century. Conspiracy theory about the
Freemasons points to the semisecretive nature of the
organization and the acknowledged political involvement of many of its members to support the allegation that the Freemasons are an extremely powerful
and wealthy cabal of antireligious subversives who
269

George Washington as a Freemason. (Library of Congress)

270

Freemasonry

have infiltrated business and government structures
worldwide.
Historical Origins
The history of Freemasonry can be difficult to
trace, in part because many of the sources available
are markedly biased. Masonic historians claim that
only Freemasons, who have been initiated into the
secrets of the order, can accurately write its history
and charge that non-Masonic scholars are frequently swayed by anti-Masonic sentiment. Conversely, those who center conspiracy theories on
Masonry argue that Freemasons have participated
in massive cover-ups of their own activities, which
make the task of the “truth-seeking” historian arduous, if not perilous.
Both Masonic historians and many anti-Masonic
conspiracy theorists assert that the roots of the order
date back to antiquity, though most third-party historians dispute this claim. The craftsmen’s guild on
which the present-day fraternal society was based
can, indeed, be traced back to the medieval era.
Some of the fraternal society’s characteristic features, such as its ritual initiation and secret signs of
membership, can also be accounted for by the
nature of masonry as a profession; members sought
to protect their status by developing elaborate forms
and rituals to ascertain eligibility and proclaim membership, and since masons tended to be itinerant
laborers, they created signs, such as the muchtouted “secret handshake,” in order to assure recognition of guild membership. The mythology embraced by Masonic tradition, however, reaches back
more than 5,000 years to encompass the architect of
Solomon’s Temple, Hiram, who is said to have been
murdered because he would not reveal the secrets
of Masonry. Some historians also link the Freemasons to the Knights Templar, a crusading monastic
order outlawed by the papacy in the fourteenth century. While pro-Masonic historians tend to elaborate
a long history of anti-Masonic persecution, conspiracy thinkers see in the same narrative a history of
secret conspiratorial plots that occasionally come to
light, but that have never been fully exposed or
interrupted.

Notwithstanding these rival accounts of Freemasonry’s past, most historians outside the debate
understand the fraternal order of Freemasons to
have emerged in Britain in the early eighteenth
century. These historians distinguish “nonoperative” or “speculative” Freemasonry as a fraternal
order whose function is primarily social, from the
much older craftsmen’s guild that served professional functions and which they term “operative”
Masonry. “Nonoperative” Masons were attracted to
the guild by its combination of rationalist/scientific
inquiry and deep respect for tradition and fellowship. Eventually, as the guild system died out and as
“speculative” membership grew, the organization
came under the leadership of the nonoperatives
and was transformed into the modern order. Membership of the Freemasons grew rapidly in the eighteenth century; the organization spread across
Europe and into the North American colonies, with
the first American lodges forming soon after 1730.
Conspiratorial Accusations
in the Eighteenth Century
The first century of Freemasonry saw explosive
growth in the popularity of the order on both the
European and North American continents, fueled
by widespread interest in the Enlightenment ideas
upon which the order based its central tenets and,
especially on the American continent, by the perceived social advantages of membership. As membership grew, so did public suspicion of the order. As
early as the 1720s, charges of immorality and lewdness were levied against the Freemasons. Since the
proceedings of Masonic gatherings were secret,
nonmembers could not find out what the organization actually did during their meetings and dinners.
Critics claimed that Masons habitually overindulged
in alcohol, and many also insisted that the all-male
meetings were little more than mass orgies, at which
sodomy and ritual flagellation were practiced. These
complaints did not, in themselves, amount to
charges of conspiracy, although later conspiracy theories adapted and reiterated them.
The earliest articulation of Freemasonry as a conspiracy came from the Roman Catholic Church,

271

Freemasonry

which claimed that the order intended to undermine the Church and its teachings. The Church’s
organized opposition to Freemasonry began in
1738, in the form of a papal bull issued by Clement
XII, which condemned Freemasonry and excommunicated all Masons. Numerous other bulls issued
in the following decades denounced the secretive
practices of the order and declared it an enemy of
Christianity. Masonic chapters were also intermittently accused of political conspiracy in Europe.
During the 1730s and 1740s, Masonic meetings
were interrupted and even banned, and members
of lodges were interrogated by police in Holland,
France, and elsewhere, as state forces came to suspect the organization of subversive political aims
and antiroyalist beliefs. The Enlightenment ideals
of religious pluralism and individual liberty
embraced by the organization increased church and
state suspicion of Freemasonry in the eighteenth
century; it was argued that the conspiratorial
actions of the group were simply the logical extension of its radical philosophies.
Conspiracy thinking about Freemasonry on the
American continent drew upon all of these charges,
though early American Freemasons tended to be
the target of mockery more than of sustained investigation. In the first half of the eighteenth century,
American Masonic lodges, generally less concerned
with Enlightenment thought than many European
lodges, functioned primarily as social clubs. Following the pattern set by British lodges, they often
rejected membership applications from individuals
who did not make an “independent” living, excluding a sizeable portion of the colonial middle classes.
After 1750, many of those rejected began to set up
their own Masonic lodges, known as “Ancient”
Freemasons. Members of these lodges were
strongly inclined to the colonial cause, while members of the older lodges (dubbed “Moderns” by the
“Ancients”) often tended to loyalism, though neither
group took an official stance. Nevertheless, the
Masonic affiliation of many key players during the
American Revolution led the order to identify itself,
in the post-Revolutionary period, with the core values of the new Republic. At the 1793 dedication of
the U.S. Capitol, for instance, President George
272

Washington wore Masonic garb and performed a
modified Masonic ritual during the ceremony,
assisted by other Masonic brethren; a silver plate
laid over the cornerstone located the dedication in
the 13th year of American independence and the
5,793rd year of Masonic history. Conspiracy thinkers
also point to the incorporation of Masonic symbolism in the design of the Great Seal of the United
States as proof that Freemasonic influence on government was pervasive in this period; however,
Freemasons deny that the all-seeing eye atop the
pyramid is a specifically Masonic symbol, although it
resembles some design elements used by Masons.
Even as the public profile of U.S. Freemasonry
improved in the 1790s, the first major wave of conspiracy thinking about Masonry was cresting in
Europe. John Robison’s exposé, Proofs of a Conspiracy against All Religions and Governments of
Europe, published in 1798, laid the blame for the
French Revolution on the Freemasons, who, he
claimed, had been thoroughly infiltrated and corrupted by a supposedly atheistic secret society
known as the Illuminati, which was founded by
Adam Weishaupt, a Jesuit priest, in 1776. Weishaupt
became a Freemason in 1777 and believed that
Freemasonry could help him to spread Illuminati
beliefs, which were based on Enlightenment
thought. Those who raised the alarm over the Illuminati charged that the extent to which they had
infiltrated and transformed Masonry was unknown.
Robison’s work raised an alarm in the United States.
Congregationalist minister and Federalist supporter
Jedidiah Morse was among those who publicly
denounced the conspiracy, which he represented as
a grave threat to the young republic. Others, such as
Timothy Dwight, president of Yale University,
joined in the growing alarm. Morse insisted he did
not mean to condemn all Freemasons; rather, he
insisted, it was only “Illuminized Masonry” that he
meant to warn against. Morse, a Federalist, claimed
that the conspirators planned to make inroads onto
the American continent through the Jeffersonian
party. Other Federalists took up the charges, and
even Masonic brother George Washington admitted
to concern over the dangerous presence of “Illuminized Masonry” in the United States. Anti-Feder-

Freemasonry

alists denied links to secret societies and responded
with conspiracy charges of their own, such as Abraham Bishop, who, in Proofs of a Conspiracy against
Christianity, and the Government of the United
States (1802), charged Robison with royalist sympathies and accused his supporters of seeking to
undermine U.S. democracy.
“Illuminized” Masonry remains a central theme
in present-day conspiracy theory about the Freemasons, but the Federalist-era controversy did not tarnish the image of Freemasonry among most members of the post-Revolutionary middle and elite
classes. On the contrary, the upper levels of U.S.
society, and those who aspired to join them, were
increasingly drawn to Freemasonry. The strong
identification of the order with key American values
enhanced Freemasonry’s popularity in the postRevolutionary United States; even more importantly, the order served increasingly useful networking functions in a nation that was actively rebuilding
its own political and social infrastructure. Masonic
membership was associated with status and power;
accordingly, those seeking status and power also
sought to become Masons.
Anti-Masonic Movement
The identification of the Masonic order with the
nation’s most powerful and influential citizens drew
increasing suspicion in the first part of the nineteenth century, culminating in the first national
anti-Masonic movement in the late 1820s and early
1830s. In contrast to the alarm raised in the wake of
Robison’s book, which, for the most part, confined
itself to members of the clergy and government
officials, the anti-Masonic movement of this period
was a genuinely populist movement. The movement was touched off by the abduction and suspected murder of William Morgan, who was in the
process of publishing an exposé of Freemasonry, in
1826. When his abductors received light sentences,
many charged that a cover-up was in process.
The reformist movement that developed in the
wake of the Morgan affair claimed that Freemasons
were anti-Christian and antidemocratic, that they
deliberately sought power and conspired to elevate
the social position of Masons, and that, if un-

checked, their growth would have disastrous consequences for the young nation. They supported this
claim by pointing out that secret societies were on
the rise; for instance, a Massachusetts congregationalist, the Reverend Peter Sanborn, argued in
1829 that a secret alliance existed between Freemasons and Phi Beta Kappa. Noting that up to a third
of college-educated men were yearly inducted into
the secret honor society, Sanborn argued that a subversive plot supported by educated youth and wellplaced older Masons would destroy the nation. In
response, in 1831 Phi Beta Kappa abandoned its
secret practices. The anti-Masonic movement also
argued that Freemasonry undermined marriage by
forcing husbands to keep secrets from wives, who
were not allowed to take part in Masonic proceedings. Women, alienated by the all-male order,
joined the anti-Masonic movement in significant
numbers.
Suspicion of Masonic practices led to the formation of an Anti-Masonic Party, the first major independent U.S. third party, in 1827. The party held its
first national convention in 1830 and in 1832 ran a
candidate for president against the Masonic incumbent, Andrew Jackson. After 1833, the party withdrew as an active force in national politics, focusing
on state and local-level campaigns. The movement
continued to decline in the late 1830s and the party
had disbanded by 1843.
During the years of the anti-Masonic campaign
and its aftermath, national membership in the
Freemasons declined significantly, and the period
saw the formation of a number of rival fraternal
organizations such as the Odd Fellows. However,
by the 1850s, Masonic membership was again on
the rise. During this decade and especially after the
Civil War, the Freemasons reformed their reputation and regained much of their former prestige.
Changes in the organization’s self-presentation
implicitly addressed some of the charges of conspiracy thinkers; the new Masonry professed Christianity, refuting claims that they sought to undermine organized religion, and countered claims of
self-interest and greed by actively promoting charity. Masons also responded to the long-standing
objections to the all-male nature of the society by
273

Freemasonry

forming a female order, the Order of the Eastern
Star, in 1869.
In 1867, the National Christian Association
revived conspiracy charges against the Masons; their
campaign led to the presidential candidacy of General John Wolcott Phelps on an anti-Masonic platform in 1880. Phelps performed very poorly in the
polls, receiving only a few hundred votes. After this
campaign, anti-Masonic groups avoided electoral
politics. Conspiracy charges against the Freemasons, however, continue until the present day.
Conspiracy theory about the Freemasons generally does not directly engage the legacy of the
Prince Hall Freemasons, an African American
Masonic organization founded in Boston in 1775.
The African American lodge received its charter
from the British Grand Lodge during the American
Revolution; after the Revolution, other U.S. lodges
refused to recognize the group, ostensibly on the
grounds that it was not “regular” because it had
been chartered by a foreign power. Racist and segregationist sentiment among many members of the
Freemasons, particularly in southern lodges, prevented their recognition of the Prince Hall order;
this nonrecognition lasted in many cases until the
1990s. Prince Hall Masonry is rarely charged with
the kind of far-reaching influence and subversive
aims of Freemasonry in general; many conspiracy
theories do not even mention its existence.
The Present
Christian conspiracy theorists in particular continue
to contend that the group’s agenda is both antiChristian and antidemocratic. Late twentieth- and
early twenty-first-century conspiracy theorists see
Freemasons as the key to the New World Order
conspiracy. Others allege that the group is satanic,
that it worships a goat-headed Luciferian god known
as Baphomet, and that it is actively involved in plots
to cover up UFO discoveries. Freemasonry has
been tapped as part of the conspiracy to assassinate
John F. Kennedy, and also plays a key role in conspiracy thinking about the Oklahoma City bombing
and, more recently, the bombings of the World
Trade Center and Pentagon on September 11.

274

In addition to forming the center of many conspiracy theories, Freemasonry, as one of the oldest
U.S. conspiracy theories, also acts as an index of
thinking about conspiracy. Anti-Masonic sentiment
in general and the anti-Masonic political movement
in particular have been cited by mid-twentiethcentury political theorists as a key example of the
“paranoid style” in U.S. politics. These scholars argue
that such large-scale suspicion of the Freemasons, a
harmless fraternal organization, reflected U.S. xenophobia and anxiety. More recently, some populist historians of the period have suggested that, in fact,
many Masons did possess a great deal of influence
and often used it nepotistically, if not conspiratorially.
Since the post-Revolutionary era saw a concentration
of power and wealth among the U.S. upper classes,
they observe, antebellum anxiety about Masonry
reflected not paranoid suspicion but a well-founded
and legitimate concern over the unequal distribution
of wealth and power in the republic.
Dana Luciano
See also: Anti-Federalists; Illuminati; Morgan,
William; Robison, John.
References
Bullock, Steven C. 1996. Revolutionary
Brotherhood: Freemasonry and the
Transformation of the American Social Order,
1730–1840. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press.
Davis, David Brion. 1960. “Some Themes of
Counter-Subversion: An Analysis of Anti-Masonic,
Anti-Catholic, and Anti Mormon Literature.” The
Mississippi Valley Historical Review 47: 205–224.
Dumenil, Lynn. 1984. Freemasonry and American
Culture, 1880–1939. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Goodman, Paul. 1988. Towards a Christian
Republic: Antimasonry and the Great Tradition in
New England, 1826–1836. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Jacob, Margaret. 1991. Living the Enlightenment:
Freemasonry and Politics in Eighteenth-Century
Europe. New York: Oxford University Press.
Knight, Stephen. 1985. The Brotherhood: The Secret
World of the Freemasons. London: Panther
Books.
Roberts, J. M. 1972. The Mythology of the Secret
Societies. London: Secker and Warburg.

Freemen

Robinson, John J. 1989. Born in Blood: The Lost
Secrets of Freemasonry. New York: M. Evans and
Company.
Vaughn, William Preston. 1983. The Antimasonic
Party in the United States, 1826–1843. Lexington:
The University Press of Kentucky.

Freemen
Based upon the ideas of past radicals, like the Posse
Comitatus and Christian Identity movements, the
Freemen movement of Montana coalesced around a
basic conspiracy-minded distrust of the government,
the corporate banking industry, and the meaning of
citizenship. Jordan, Montana, rests on the western
Great Plains far from urban intellectual centers, but
the thoughts of that community’s Freemen stood
close to the hearts of many Americans. By the mid1990s, the ideology of the Freemen reflected powerful fears prevalent in U.S. thought.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, the Ralph
Clark family felt the sting of bankers’ investments
and the government’s policies. Caught between rising interest rates and falling property values, the
Clarks sought shelter from government foreclosure
on their home, which had been mortgaged to
finance a land purchase. The seed of discontent
planted by the local Posse Comitatus bore fruit as
local farmers, like Clark, banded together to “study”
their common concerns. The government, they
thought, was in cahoots with Jewish bankers and
meant to destroy the United States, beginning with
bankrupting the farmers and ranchers.
In February 1994, the Freemen took action,
flooding the area’s county courthouses with documents asserting personal sovereignty and charging
elected officials with failing to carry out their duties.
When the office holders failed to respond, the
Freemen held a “common law” court, found them
guilty, and filed liens on their property for as much
as $1 million. In March, the county attorney issued
arrest warrants against the Freemen for impersonating public servants and charged some with criminal syndicalism. After issuing the order, Nickolas
Murnion, the county attorney, said that one of the

Freemen approached him, saying that they were
going to leave him swinging from a bridge. The
Freemen’s plans, however, encompassed more than
intimidation of local, state, and federal employees.
LeRoy Schweitzer provided the financial instrument for the group’s initial exploits. Embittered by
run-ins with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS),
Schweitzer came upon a solution for revealing the
government and banking fraud. By using a line of
“credit” from the liens filed against local and
national officials, the Freemen could supposedly
access money without interference from financial
institutions. By utilizing this system, the Freemen
believed they could prove the falsehood of the
banking system while paying off their debts.
In Montana, the Freemen exercised their own
law and order to score a series of successes.
Schweitzer’s credit scheme converted liens into
“LeRoy checks.” Several businesses, state agencies,
and even the IRS accepted the payments. The
Freemen have maintained that they paid off their
debts fairly. Schweitzer believed it was “honorable
to repay a debt in double, which he did for himself
and anyone else who needed relief.” Of course if the
state or federal agency sent the Freemen a return
check for the overpaid amount, they kept it as their
own money. The Freemen eventually issued 3,432
checks totaling $15.5 billion. With this evidence, the
Freemen thought it was possible to expose the government and return the nation to a sound financial
basis.
Mobilized by an influx of cash, the Freemen purchased a variety of devices to send and receive information. Schweitzer filled his home with the latest
computers, modems, laser printers, and facsimile
machines that allowed the group to tap into international sources. The men also attempted to purchase
materials for armed confrontation, such as radio
equipment, rifles, and high-power ammunition.
In June 1995, four Freemen instructors held
three-day training sessions for $300 per pupil.
Schweitzer offered to waive the $300 fee for the
attendees, largely out-of-state Patriot organizations, if
they would pledge their manpower, skills, and armaments to help found their own sovereign territory.

275

Fugitive Slave Act

The FBI informer within the cabin witnessed LeRoy
Schweitzer’s presentation on economics, which captured the attention of the students during the threeday seminar. This hands-on instruction included how
to file liens against private individuals or government
officials and how to write “LeRoy” checks. The presentation also included segments on forming independent republics with small armies of approximately
200 men.
In September 1995, the Freemen leaders moved
their home base from a cabin outside Roundup,
Montana, to a new location, dubbed Justus Township, outside of Jordan, Montana, on the Ralph Clark
ranch. For almost seven months, the FBI watched,
waited, and collected more evidence on the
Freemen as hundreds of people entered the compound to hear their message.
In the end, a standoff resulted from the local
community’s unwillingness to put up with the
Freemen. In early March 1996, the Freemen issued
a statement that they would arrest and punish all
trespassers, including ranchers who leased land
from the state of Montana. The threatened ranchers, tired of the FBI’s “Weaver Fever” inactivity—a
reference to the agency’s hesitation after the
botched Ruby Ridge assault—approached Sheriff
Charles Phipps about forming a legal posse to protect local citizens and arrest the Freemen. On 25
March 1996 the community’s resolve forced the FBI
to move quickly and arrest Schweitzer and another
leader, Dan Petersen. Although the standoff continued eighty-one days after the arrest of key leaders,
the Freemen movement had died from a lack of
support in the eastern Montana communities. Support from fellow militia groups fell short of expectations as only ten Patriots mustered for a rally in
nearby Lewistown. The FBI’s evidence eventually
helped convict fifteen Freemen and convinced six to
plead guilty.
At the turn of the twenty-first century, the goals of
the Freemen nevertheless still resonated in rural
America, echoing concerns about getting back to the
faith of Christianity, limiting the role of government,
and revising the financial system of the United
States. The nonviolent negotiations carried out by
law enforcement in 1996 contrasted with the Ruby
276

Ridge and Waco incidents earlier in the decade and
forced organizations like the Freemen to rethink
their methods of battling cultural, political, and economic decline.
Steve Shay
See also: Christian Identity; Militias; Posse
Comitatus.
Reference
Neiwert, David. 1999. In God’s Country: The Patriot
Movement and the Pacific Northwest. Pullman,
WA: Washington State University Press.

Fugitive Slave Act
The Fugitive Slave Act was enacted in 1850 as a part
of a larger compromise orchestrated by Senator
Henry Clay of Kentucky in an attempt to patch the
growing rift between the North and South over the
expansion of slavery into the Western territories.
The law, which was basically a revision of the 1793
Fugitive Slave Law, was seen as a federal conspiracy
by both northerners and southerners and made the
prospect of liberty for blacks, north and south, slave
and free, seem even further out of reach.
The Fugitive Slave Law of 1793 was passed in a
similar climate of sectional differences following
the American Revolution and the emergence of the
United States as a nation. In 1793, slavery had been
abolished or was being abolished in eight of the
northern states while it remained legal in seven
southern states. The United States Congress passed
the law in 1793 in order to allow slave catchers to
return fugitive slaves in the free states back to their
owners in the South. The law merely required oral
testimony by the slave catcher that the person he
had found was indeed a slave. The person thus captured had no guarantee to the right of trial and any
person found guilty of harboring the accused fugitive would have to pay a fine of $500.
The law limited the rights of blacks in the North
whether a fugitive or born free, because it made it
possible for slave catchers to abduct any black person from the North and simply claim that he or she
was a runaway slave. Even if an abducted black
could prove that he or she had been born free or
had been set free, their limited rights to a trial

Fugitive Slave Act

Runaway slaves try to escape their irate master and other pursuers. (Library of Congress)

meant that such evidence may not be permitted in
court. Recognizing the disparity between the constitutional rights given to U.S. citizens and the
restrictions placed on blacks in the North due to the
1793 laws, many northerners fought to pass state
laws that would provide its black citizens with some
effective means of getting around the federal law.
Between the passage of the first Fugitive Slave
Law of 1793 and the second of 1850, several northern states enacted a series of personal liberty laws
that would allow captured blacks accused of being
fugitives the right to trial by jury and would require
written documentation of their ownership to be presented by their captors. Many such laws also provided for the prosecution of kidnappers who
abducted free blacks in the North and forbade the
use of state facilities in assisting with such endeavors.
Such concessions given to blacks in the North
angered southern slave owners, who claimed that the
northern states were conspiring against them and
denying them of their property and prompted the

South to clamor for more rigorous federal enforcement of the 1793 law.
The quest for an end to sectional disagreements
in both the Whig and Democratic Parties culminated in Clay’s Compromise of 1850. This compromise consisted of five separate bills:
1. The admission of California as a free state.
2. Moving the Texas border east, out of New
Mexico territory.
3. The organization of the Arizona, Nevada,
New Mexico, and Utah territories with a provision that popular sovereignty would decide
if they would later be admitted as slave or
free states.
4. The Fugitive Slave Act.
5. The abolition of the slave trade in Washington, D.C.
As the biggest concession to slave owners in the
South, the new Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 suc277

Fugitive Slave Act

ceeded in rolling back some of the rights attained
by blacks in the North by overriding the laws of
individual states in mandating the return of runaway slaves.
Clay’s bill for the Fugitive Slave Act was divided
into four sections. The first allowed the claimant
(either the owner or the slave catcher) to take the
accused fugitive to any court, commissioner, clerk,
marshal, postmaster, or customs official to stake his
claim within the state where the alleged fugitive
was apprehended. All of the officials of the first section, with the exception of the federal marshal,
were granted the authority by the second section to
issue a warrant for the arrest of the accused. The
third section doubled the fine set down in 1793
from $500 to $1,000 to anyone found guilty of harboring the accused fugitive or to any federal marshal who failed to enforce the law. The last section
of the bill gave federal marshals the right to act in
place of the owner or the owner’s agent in capturing
suspected fugitives. Once the bill was passed into
law, the act further mandated that commissioners
presiding over the cases of accused fugitive slaves
would receive a $5 paperwork fee if the accused
was set free and a $10 fee if the accused was found
guilty and returned to slavery.
Political opponents of the law in the North argued
that the difference in the amount paid to the commissioner based on the ruling would entice officials
to find in favor of the slave catcher in order to earn
more money in such cases. Southerners, on the
other hand, argued that the law did not do enough
to ensure that their property was being returned and

278

further argued that northerners were conspiring
against them by not attempting to enforce the law.
Sectional rivalries between northern and southern
whites continued as usual, while blacks in both the
North and the South found their prospects for freedom in the United States severely limited.
Though it is unclear whether or not the law actually stopped slaves from attempting to escape to
freedom, it is clear that those blacks who had already
found their freedom in the North had reason to fear
the new law. Within the first year and a half of the
law’s enactment, only five out of eighty-nine accused
fugitives were set free. Many northern blacks, fearing seizure, fled further north to Canada. Between
the time the bill was passed into law in late September of 1850 and the end of the year, an estimated
3,000 blacks had fled to Canada.
Questions of who the law actually benefited and
who it conspired against became irrelevant with the
eruption of the Civil War in 1860 and the subsequent enactment of Abraham Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation in 1863.
Michele Ren
See also: Abolitionism; Lincoln, Abraham,
Assassination of; Mexican-American War.
References
Campbell, Stanley W. 1968. The Slave Catchers.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
McPherson, James M. 1988. Battle Cry of Freedom:
The Civil War Era. New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Website
Fugitive Slave Act (1850): http://www.yale.edu/
lawweb/avalon/fugitive.htm.

G
Genet, Citizen Edmond Charles
Edmond Charles Genet (known as “Citizen Genet”)
was French ambassador to the United States in the
1790s, and was accused of engaging in clandestine
schemes detrimental to American interests.
He was born in Versailles in 1763, the son of a
royal bureaucrat. While he was still an adolescent,
his intelligence and family connections secured him
a clerkship in the foreign affairs ministry. In 1787, he
was appointed secretary of the Russian embassy in
St. Petersburg, but Genet’s zealous support of the
French Revolution led Catherine the Great to order
his removal in 1792. Back home in France, Genet
was hailed by the ruling Girondin faction as a hero of
the republic and welcomed into the highest circles of
government. His newfound fame led to his appointment as minister to the United States, charged with
the important task of improving the relations
between the two countries that had deteriorated
since the American Revolution.
When Genet departed for the United States in
early 1793, he was only thirty years old, an impulsive, rash young man whose native talents were
never honed by hard work. This was unfortunate,
for the difficulty of his assignment was enough to
tax even the most artful diplomat. First, Genet was
to negotiate with a generally pro-British Washington administration a new treaty granting more commercial favors to France. Second, he was to ask
Americans to support attacks upon Spanish and
English possessions in North America, schemes
that would very likely involve the young nation in

international hostilities. And last, Genet, in effect,
had to convince the Americans to pay for his mission and its intrigues, for the French government
had not appropriated any funds for the purpose;
rather, they hoped that the money would come
from an advance payment of the $5.6 million debt
the United States owed France.
In April 1793, Genet arrived in Charleston where
he was given a hero’s welcome by a host of state dignitaries. Wanting to see the country, Genet embarked for Philadelphia by land and, after a monthlong, triumphant journey north, arrived in the
nation’s capital and was honored, in his own words,
with “perpetual fêtes.” The popular adulation, combined with initial amicable meetings with federal
officials, apparently led Genet to believe that the
success of his mission was assured.
He was, of course, wrong. While Genet was on
his way to Philadelphia, the Washington administration had issued the Proclamation of Neutrality, forbidding “all acts and proceedings whatsoever” that
would involve Americans in the European conflict.
Undaunted and apparently oblivious to the niceties
of international protocol, Genet set in motion a
chain of events that would shortly force the Washington administration to demand his recall. First,
without the approval or, indeed, the knowledge of
the U.S. government, Genet issued letters of
marque for privateers—manned primarily by U.S.
crews—to prey on British shipping. The prizes,
when brought back to U.S. ports, were to be condemned and sold in courts set up by local French
279

Genet, Citizen Edmond Charles

consuls. Immediately, the Washington administration protested that licensing the seizure of foreign
ships was a violation of U.S. neutrality and the sale
of prizes on U.S. soil was a violation of U.S. sovereignty. To no avail, Genet argued that France asked
no more than what it granted the infant U.S. during
the American Revolution and that his actions were
fully justified by the 1778 Franco-American treaty.
A second and potentially more volatile category of
Genet’s schemes was his vision of “liberating”
Louisiana, Florida, and Canada from their Spanish
and English masters. While in South Carolina,
Genet delegated the scheme to seize Spanish
Florida to the French consul in Charleston, Michel
Ange Mangourit, who assembled 300 men under
the command of a Revolutionary War veteran, Elijah Clarke. Out west, as the French were well
aware, the settlers were furious with the national
government due to their inability to secure the navigation of the Spanish-controlled Mississippi River
or protect the citizens from Indian attacks. Having
been instructed to take advantage of this situation
and foment an attack upon New Orleans, Genet
was elated when, upon arriving in Philadelphia, a
letter awaited him from the Revolutionary War
hero George Rogers Clark. Clark, now a deeply
embittered and indebted alcoholic living in
Louisville, Kentucky, offered to raise a 1,500-man
army to march on New Orleans. Genet promptly
sent French botanist André Michaux, armed with a
letter of recommendation from Thomas Jefferson,
to begin talks with the Kentuckians.
Both expeditions, however, were dismal failures,
primarily due to the inability of Genet to secure
funding and the Washington administration’s determined opposition to his plans. The lack of money
was due to the Washington administration’s refusal
to advance payment on the $5.6 million debt. Upon
receiving the news in mid-June, Genet, left without
any means of financing his ambitious intrigues and
rightly fearing the imminent collapse of his entire
mission, attacked the administration in a number of
impolitic letters. Underestimating the power of the
executive branch and overestimating the force of
public opinion, Genet believed he could appeal to
the American people over Washington’s head. The
280

effort backfired, however; the American public was
dismayed as word leaked of his discourtesies toward
the Washington administration. In August, Thomas
Jefferson wrote to the American minister in Paris,
formally requesting Genet’s recall.
Meanwhile, in South Carolina, Washington’s Neutrality Proclamation cooled the ardor of Governor
William Moultrie, who immediately forbade any further recruitment for an attack on Florida. Shortly
after, before Elijah Clarke and his men could seriously complicate U.S. relations with Spain, they
were ordered to disband. In Kentucky, George
Rogers Clark’s previous boast that 1,500 men would
flock to his banner proved to be exaggerated. No
more than a few dozen volunteers ever appeared,
nor did the money promised him by the French. Any
remaining enthusiasm for attacking New Orleans
dissipated when several high officials, including Jefferson and the governor of the Northwest Territories, Arthur St. Clair, made it abundantly clear that
anyone who supported an attack upon Spanish territory would be subject to prosecution.
Back in France, meanwhile, the newly ascendant
Jacobins denounced Genet as an enemy of the
republic. Concerned about continuing the supply of
U.S. foodstuffs, the French government quickly
granted America’s request for a recall, and Genet’s
replacement, Jean Fauchet, revoked all commissions issued by Genet and canceled the expeditions
against Spanish territories.
Faced with the very real possibility of execution
should he return to France, Genet chose to remain
in the United States. In 1794 he married the daughter of New York Governor George Clinton. After
spending eight years on a farm in Long Island,
Edmond and Cornelia Genet moved to an estate
outside Albany, where they raised six children.
Genet spent the rest of his days as a landed gentleman, tinkering with inventions and only occasionally involving himself in politics. He died on Bastille
Day, 1834.
Matthew Schoenbachler
References
Ammon, Harry. 1973. The Genet Mission. New York:
Norton.
Sheridan, Eugene. 1994. “The Recall of Edmond

German Americans and World War I

Charles Genet: A Study in Transatlantic Politics
and Diplomacy.” Diplomatic History 18: 463–488.
Sioli, Marco. 1995. “Citizen Genet and Political
Struggle in the Early American Republic.” Revue
Française d’Etudes Americaines 64: 259–267.

German Americans and World War I
Fears of German American subversion surfaced
many times in the United States in the twentieth
century. The publication of the Zimmerman
telegram and the sinking of the Lusitania, two still
controversial events that contributed to the United
States entering World War I, were not the only
causes for U.S. alarm in the face of growing Ger-

“Halt the Hun!” Third Liberty Loan Poster by Henry
Patrick Raleigh, 1918. (Corbis)

man aggression. Beginning well before the nation’s
entry into the war and lasting beyond the war’s end,
many Americans shared a conspiracy-minded fear
of espionage and sabotage by what Henry Landau
once called “the Enemy Within,” a contingent of
German Americans suspected of being more loyal
to the Fatherland than to their new homeland.
Posters and pamphlets produced by the Committee on Public Information during the years of U.S.
involvement in World War I depict German military
aggression as an external threat, geographically distant but never completely removed from the North
American continent. In one such poster the German
soldier is a brutal giant holding a rifle and bayonet
and stomping around a war-torn Europe; Europe
and the rampaging Hun are separated from the
Statue of Liberty, and the nation it represents, by
only a thin strip of water. A second poster presents
the U.S. infantry marching off to join the battle as
the modern equivalent to medieval knights riding
off to fight in a holy war against the infidel. World
War I was thus regularly presented in the United
States as a necessary and just war against an external
threat. However, there was also an emerging sense
of a threat from within, a fear of espionage and sabotage that grew out of the large number of unassimilated, politically organized German Americans living in the United States in the early decades of the
twentieth century. Many of these German Americans continued to use their native tongue in daily life
and to define themselves and their communities
against mainstream U.S. culture.
German American Culture
In the nineteenth century, a pluralistic Germanlanguage culture had existed in the United States; as
late as 1910, an estimated 9 million people in the
United States still spoke German as their native
tongue. They formed the broad basis for readership
of a large variety of German-language newspapers
and publications and supplied membership for
German-language clubs and parishes as well as the
National German-American Alliance (1901–1918),
an organization that actively opposed U.S. entry into
World War I. These many speakers of German were
also the force behind attempts at offering German
281

Ghost Dance Religion

as a language of instruction, or at least as a foreign
language elective, in public schools. Although by
1910 the German language was already being displaced by English among the younger generation,
World War I drew a sharp cutoff line for German
language instruction in the entire country. In 1919,
German language instruction was forbidden in several states, including Indiana and Nebraska. In
Nebraska v. Meyer, the Supreme Court decision in
1923, this ban was overturned.
The action of the first half of Willa Cather’s
Pulitzer Prize–winning novel of 1922, One of Ours,
is set near the city of Frankfort, Nebraska, and
dramatizes the new distrust toward German Americans growing out of the tensions that peaked with
the nation’s entry into war. In book three of Cather’s
novel, a charge of disloyalty is brought against two
established German immigrant farmers. The evidence presented by the neighbors against the two
men is “confused and almost humorous,” yet the
judge decides the case against them and assigns a
fine. In later sections of the novel, Cather continues
to show her sympathy for German Americans in her
depiction of two older women persecuted by their
more thoroughly assimilated neighbors.

declaration of war against Germany on 6 April 1917
came stringent controls to prevent further acts of
sabotage. These included the issuing of two “Alien
Enemy Presidential Proclamations” and the establishing of internment camps for people of German
birth residing in the United States who had not
completed the naturalization process.
Suspicions of an imperial German conspiracy
have largely faded from public consciousness along
with the more general cultural memory of World
War I, but related conspiracy theories—particularly
those involving the Lusitania and the Zimmerman
telegram—are still in circulation. The Black Tom
explosion is perhaps the exception, as it has been the
subject of several recent, highly speculative studies
and has gained new relevance with the September
11 attack on the World Trade Center, which sent the
United States scrambling anew to uncover networks
of saboteurs and those who fund them. Within two
weeks of the World Trade Center’s destruction, a
guest columnist at ABQjournal reminded his readers that September 11 may not have been the first
time the city was bombed by agents of a foreign
power: “N.Y. Was Attacked by Terrorists in 1916.”

Suspected Acts of Sabotage
Even before the United States officially entered the
war, there were suspicious fires and explosions at a
number of U.S. plants and supply terminals. In January 1915, then again in November of the same
year, fire consumed the Roebling plant in Trenton,
New Jersey, where armaments and antisubmarine
netting for the Allied powers were manufactured. A
set of explosions, likewise attributed by many to
German saboteurs, occurred in early January 1917
in munitions plants in Kingsland, New Jersey. The
most spectacular of such explosions was the “Black
Tom” incident of 30 July 1916. More than 2 million
pounds of munitions stored on Black Tom Island in
New York Harbor exploded; the explosion and the
resulting fire caused enormous damage and killed
three men and a child. These munitions were awaiting shipment to the Allies for use against Germany.
The incident has thus been viewed by many as an
act of sabotage by German agents. With Congress’s

See also: Lusitania, Sinking of; Zimmerman
Telegram.
References
Cather, Willa. 1922. One of Ours. New York: Knopf.
Landau, Henry. 1937. The Enemy Within: The
Inside Story of German Sabotage in America.
New York: Putnam’s.
Swickard, Michael. 2001 “N.Y. Was Attacked by
Terrorists in 1916.” ABQjournal. http://www.
abqjournal.com/opinion/guest_columns/
aguest09–20–01.htm.
Volkman, Ernest. 1996. Espionage: The Greatest
Spy Operations of the Twentieth Century. New
York: Wiley.
Witcover, Jules. 1989. Sabotage at Black Tom:
Imperial Germany’s Secret War in America,
1914–1917. Chapel Hill, NC: Algonquin Books.

282

James B. Kelley

Ghost Dance Religion
Wovoka (Jack Wilson), a Paiute mystic from
Nevada, revived the teachings of Tävibo, a member

Ghost Dance Religion

Ghost Dance—Cheyenne and Arapahoe. (Library of Congress)

of the Paiute tribe, following a series of powerful
visions beginning in 1886. A short time later,
Wovoka began instructing proselytes in the Wanagi
Wacipi (Ghost Dance, or the Dance of the Souls
Departed), a sacred ceremony designed to hasten
earthly renewal for all American Indians, living and
dead. Wovoka’s teachings spread rapidly among a
dispirited and hungry people assigned to desolate
western reservations. Government officials, frightened settlers, and Christian missionaries responded
to the Ghost Dance’s popularity with alarm. To
complicate matters, newspapers flooded the public
with exaggerated tales of an Indian Messiah and
impending rebellion. The unconfirmed conspiracy
allegations later culminated in the murder of Sitting
Bull, a respected Hunkpapa chief, and the massacre
of 150 American Indian men, women, and children

at Wounded Knee, South Dakota, in December
1890.
When the Lakota tribe learned about the Wanagi
Wacipi in 1889 they dispatched a delegation to
meet Wovoka and to join in the dancing. After the
delegation returned to South Dakota the following
April, tribal leaders convened a council. To quell
any disturbance that the proposed gathering might
cause, the government’s Indian agent in Pine Ridge,
South Dakota, arrested three of Wovoka’s disciples
and detained them until the prisoners offered
assurances that no councils would be held. Other
Indian agents in the Dakotas withheld rations until
the dancing stopped.
The popularity of the ritual led many non-Indian
observers to conclude that widespread dancing was
a precursor to armed rebellion. Residents of both
283

Ghost Dance Religion

Dakotas panicked when they learned of the Ghost
Dance’s allure. Charles Hyde, a resident of Pierre,
South Dakota, informed the secretary of the interior that he had obtained information about a
planned Indian outbreak. Although an investigation
later revealed that there was no cause for apprehension, tensions remained high. On 26 September
1890 residents of Mead County wrote to Thomas J.
Morgan, the commissioner of Indian affairs, warning that Indians were planning an uprising. Perain
P. Palmer, Cheyenne River’s new agent, confirmed
that dancers with Winchester rifles were preparing
for the arrival of a messiah.
Political leaders took notice when Kicking Bear
carried a militant version of the Ghost Dance to
Standing Rock in the Dakotas. James McLaughlin,
Standing Rock’s agent, expressed grave concern
when Sitting Bull, a Hunkpapa chief and symbol of
American Indian resistance, expressed an interest
in the ceremony. Although McLaughlin successfully evicted Kicking Bear from Standing Rock, the
dance’s popularity continued unabated throughout
the Dakotas.
The Newspaper War
During the fall of 1890 reporters flooded the Dakotas. Rex Alan Smith, author of the acclaimed Moon
of Popping Trees (1981), comments that the resulting “newspaper war” inflamed an already unstable
situation. Reporters from the Chicago Daily Tribune, Omaha Daily Bee, Harper’s Weekly, and the
New York Times emphasized the hostile nature of
the Ghost Dance religion, when, in reality, Wovoka
emphasized peace and brotherhood. “War correspondents” who rushed to the scene also paid a Pine
Ridge “news factory” to supply them with melodramatic conspiracy stories and titillating rumors. As a
result, reporters on the scene flooded the uninformed American public with outright lies. Local
newspapers, especially the Pierre Free Press and the
Rapid City Journal, also contributed to the settlers’
unwarranted fears. In an attempt to stop the hysteria, Charles Moody, editor of the Sturgis Weekly
Record, and Elaine Goodale Eastman, a noted educator living in the Dakotas, condemned the “wild
and wooly newspaper liars.” Terrified North and
284

South Dakotans, however, ignored the pleas for
calm.
By September 1890 the Ghost Dance had also
reached the Cheyenne, Arapaho, and Kiowa communities of the Southern Plains. Newspapers in
Guthrie, El Reno, and Oklahoma City also circulated
rumors of frenzied dancers, scalping parties, and
impending warfare. Not surprisingly, terrified inhabitants responded to the news by requesting military
protection. During this period, however, Thomas J.
Morgan was completing a tour of the western reservations. His visits to the Southern Plains convinced
the commissioner of Indian affairs that the reports
from Oklahoma were grossly exaggerated. A subsequent investigation, which found no evidence of danger, advocated a policy of noninterference until the
dancing had stopped.
The Ghost Dance War
Daniel F. Royer, the new agent at Pine Ridge, buckled under the pressure of the escalating crisis. Fearful for his own safety, a frightened Royer informed
his superiors that 3,000 crazed Indians were dancing in the snow. Royer and other agents reported
that they were at the mercy of “wild and crazy”
Indians. Fearing the worst, bureaucrats informed
the Dakota agents that President Benjamin Harrison had authorized the use of military force to suppress the Ghost Dance on 14 November 1890.
Dr. Valentine McGillycuddy, a former agent at
Pine Ridge, rushed to the scene. In his opinion, the
presence of armed soldiers only exacerbated
the threat of violence. Many dancers, alarmed at
the troops’ presence, fled to the security of the
Stronghold, a natural Badlands fortress located 50
miles northwest of the agency. McGillycuddy, an
eyewitness to the unfolding tragedy, correctly predicted that there would be trouble unless the soldiers immediately withdrew from the region.
On 11 December 1890 Sitting Bull requested permission to travel to Pine Ridge. Rather than allow
the Lakota chief to bolster the Ghost Dance’s popularity, General Nelson A. Miles approved James
McLaughlin’s request to arrest Sitting Bull, the
dance’s “high priest and leading apostle.” Four days
later a bungled arrest attempt resulted in Sitting

Gold Standard

Bull’s murder. Angry Hunkpapas, fearing for their
own safety, bolted Standing Rock and fled to Indian
camps along the Cheyenne River in South Dakota.
Although Hump, a Miniconjou adherent of the
Ghost Dance, had surrendered peacefully on 21
December 1890 at Fort Bennett, Big Foot’s band
decided to flee to Pine Ridge.
Major Samuel M. Whitside’s Seventh Cavalry
finally caught the desperate band of 370 Indians at
Porcupine Butte and escorted them to Wounded
Knee Creek on 28 December 1890. The next day
Colonel James Forsyth gave orders to disarm the
Indian camp. During the subsequent search a scuffle ensued, causing a rifle to fire. The soldiers, fearing that they were being attacked, responded with
deadly force. When the smoke cleared some 150
Lakota men, women, and children lay dead.
Following the tragedy at Wounded Knee Wovoka
withdrew from the spotlight and encouraged the
Ghost Dance adherents to travel the “white man’s
road.” He died in Yerington, Nevada, on 4 October
1932. Sadly, the jingoism of the “war correspondents” assigned to cover the Ghost Dance in the
Dakotas contributed to the bloody episodes of
December 1890. The Wounded Knee tragedy was
the culmination of thirty years of armed conflict
between the U.S. military and American Indians.
Although never completely removed from the public’s consciousness, the Ghost Dance religion and
the Wounded Knee massacre received renewed
interest during the modern civil rights movement
and the takeover of Wounded Knee, South Dakota,
by members of the American Indian Movement in
1973.
Jon Brudvig
See also: American Indian Movement; Native
Americans.
References
Eastman, Elaine Goodale. 1945. “The Ghost Dance
and Wounded Knee Massacre of 1890–91.”
Nebraska History 26: 26–42.
Hittman, Michael. 1997. Wovoka and the Ghost
Dance. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Mooney, James. 1991. The Ghost Dance Religion
and the Sioux Outbreak of 1890. Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press.

Smith, Rex Alan. 1981. Moon of Popping Trees: The
Tragedy at Wounded Knee and the End of the
Indian Wars. Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press.

Gold Standard
Control of the money supply has been a key component of every regime in history, and when looking
for a conspiracy, most theorists “follow the
money”—in this case, the government’s relationship
to gold. Roman emperors were notorious for shaving gold coins so that they would look normal but
actually contain slightly less gold, thereby allowing
the rulers to inflate even a gold-based currency.
Generally, however, by the Middle Ages most monarchs were constrained by the ease of weighing and
measuring gold, and therefore found it difficult to
meddle with the state’s money supply. Instead, they
borrowed against both gold reserves and taxes.
Throughout this period, silver was desired for
coinage, but its value was almost always measured
against gold. Since silver was mined at an approximate stable ratio to gold (somewhere in the range of
13–17 ounces of silver taken out of the ground for
every ounce of gold), the relative value of silver to
gold remained fairly constant over the centuries.
Perhaps surprisingly, the large discoveries of gold
and silver in the New World—mostly in Spanishheld territory—did not significantly alter the European economy. Prices did begin a gradual creep
upward in about 1200, and increased sharply at
times, correlating roughly with the “commercial
revolution,” then again with the birth of capitalism
in the late 1700s. Of course, other events unrelated
to gold or silver production also caused prices to
skyrocket, as with the grain shortages in France in
the 1780s. The important point, though, is that gold
remained the polestar by which virtually all other
values in the European world were fixed, and thus
it obtained a certain mythic character.
Gold proved the world’s most useful and reliable
money in the premodern world because it possessed several important characteristics of money:
(1) it was easily divisible, (2) it was (somewhat)
portable, (3) it had inherent jewelry value, (4) it was
285

Gold Standard

scarce, and (5) it was durable. Gold’s scarcity, however, became increasingly unattractive as a characteristic of money in the developing European economy and in the United States, where capitalism
demanded constant exchange, financing, and,
above all, a steadily growing circulating medium. By
1800, mining and minting of gold coin in no way
could keep pace with the demands of the capitalist
system. Nor could silver adequately fill in: what
capitalism demanded was an order-of-magnitude
increase in the money supply, not the minor incremental surge provided by minting silver.
The Bank of England, the world’s first “central
bank,” was the first to break from the “mercantilist”
notion that only gold and silver constituted wealth.
The Bank operated on a gold reserve upon which it
issued banknotes that were redeemable in gold.
What note holders and depositors did not know
(and were not told) was that if all those holding
notes suddenly and simultaneously appeared at the
bank to redeem their paper money in gold (and
later, silver coin), there would not be nearly enough
metal in all of England to redeem every note at 100
percent (“par”) value. A banking term, “fractional
reserve banking,” was used to describe the concept,
which relied on a statistical probability (or, at the
time in the 1700s, a likelihood based on common
sense) that only a fraction of the note holders would
ever appear at any given time to redeem their paper
money in gold or silver “specie” (coin).
To a conspiracy theorist, this had all the indications of a plot. It appeared that the Bank of England,
with the support (or at the direction) of the king, was
deliberately cheating the public by issuing notes that
it could not redeem in an emergency. In fact, “fractional reserve banking” involved a trade-off in which
the public agreed to accept paper money for its convenience in exchange for a small amount of risk.
What went unstated was the degree of risk, or under
what conditions the money would not be redeemable.
Scottish “free” banks approached the matter differently. They did not attempt to mandate any specific reserve ratio, but rather allowed competition
to sort out the good from the bad banks. However,

286

if a bank failed, its president and directors were
subject to double liability for the loss. Lawrence
White has argued convincingly that the Scottish system proved extremely stable and resilient, especially in contrast to the Bank of England. Competitive money, rather than gold convertibility of a
national currency, White maintained, was the key to
a stable monetary system.
In the United States, state legislatures attempted
to bridge the gap between the two systems. States
adopted a system of chartered banks whose charters
authorized them to issue paper notes, backed by
specie. The banks had to maintain convertibility at
all times. This did not prove difficult in normal economic circumstances, but during panics, almost
every bank in the state—or even the nation—could
“suspend” specie payments and simply refuse to
convert paper money for gold or silver. According to
the bank charters, the legislature was to terminate
the bank’s authority to do business, but in fact, since
suspension was nearly universal, and termination
would effectively shut down all banks, legislatures
rarely invoked these clauses. Instead, banks
resumed business—and payment of specie—as soon
as economic conditions warranted.
Still, a healthy competition among banknotes let
people know which institution’s notes were reliable,
and which were not. A “Dun and Bradstreet” catalogue of banknotes, called Dillistin’s Bank Note Reporter, was published and widely circulated among
bankers and merchants. It accurately and in a
timely fashion alerted storekeepers to money that
had lost its value on the open market. Still, to operate as a bank, until the 1830s and the appearance of
“free banking” laws, an institution required a charter from the state legislature in order to issue notes.
It was note issue that differentiated chartered banks
from “private” banks—deposit and lending operations. But the burden of chartering numerous new
banks in the booming 1840s proved great enough
that many states adopted “free banking” laws, further severing the relationship between the paper
money and gold. Under the “free banking” laws, all
a bank had to do to issue notes was to place an
appropriate amount of designated bonds on deposit

Gold Standard

with the secretary of state. After minor problems
with the wording of the laws were ironed out in
Michigan and other states, free banking proved
effective and reliable. Indeed, in the U.S. antebellum period, competitive note issue, backed by a
gold reserve, more than adequately served the
economy’s needs. When competition was enhanced
by a branch banking system (which many states
allowed), the system became even stronger and
more reliable.
Wedged into this mix were the First and Second
Banks of the United States (BUS, 1791–1811, and
1816–1836, respectively). These were national
banks that were four-fifths privately owned, and
could issue notes that had a universal quality in that
the Banks were the only institutions permitted to
have interstate branches. Because of their ubiquity
and national character, they were viewed by critics
as inordinately powerful and “controlled” by foreign
interests. However, they were still both tied to the
gold standard.
Of equal concern to the conspiracy-minded was a
suspicious change of the Constitution’s Article I,
Section 8, which states, “The Congress shall have
Power . . . To coin Money, regulate the Value
thereof, and of foreign Coin. . . .” According to the
“gold bugs,” or early “hard money” advocates, this
section stipulated that the phrase “coin Money”
meant only metallic money could constitute the circulating medium of the United States. The Jacksonian Democrats, especially, interpreted the
phrase this way and demanded an end to all noteissue by private banks. Led by Thomas Hart “Old
Bullion” Benton, the “hard money” wing of the
Democratic Party wanted to stop all banks from
printing paper money, threatening to cease chartering any banks at all if they could not ensure it in
other ways.
The United States, like England, had never “gone
off” the gold standard, in that all international transactions were delineated in gold and currencies of all
types were still redeemable in gold. Moreover, from
time to time, such as Andrew Jackson’s “Specie Circular,” payments on government land were required
to be made in gold. When the value of silver or gold

changed, the U.S. Congress or Parliament passed a
law reestablishing the value of silver to gold, not vice
versa.
The Civil War brought new pressures on the gold
standard. Abraham Lincoln’s Union government
needed additional revenue to finance the war, and
temporarily suspended all gold redemption, then
authorized the printing of $450 million in “greenbacks.” These notes differed from previous money
in that they were not immediately redeemable in
gold, but rather had a promise to pay in gold at a
future date. In addition to the greenbacks, the
Union chartered a wave of national banks, which
had the authority to print money, and, in order to
remove competition from the national banks, the
government passed a 10 percent tax on all nonnational banknotes, effectively eliminating all competition with government money. Thus, in a period
of three years, the link to gold was temporarily severed and competition in note issue ended.
Following the Civil War, the United States felt
the effects of an international deflation. Due to the
idiosyncrasies of the national banking system, this
deflation hit the South and the West harder than
other sections of the country, and there was an
acute shortage of money in the West, especially. At
the same time, new silver discoveries (the Comstock Lode, for example) had boosted the amount
of silver coming out of the ground relative to gold.
Instead of a ratio of 16 ounces of silver to one ounce
of gold, by the 1870s the ratio reached 17:1. Politicians and agrarian activists saw an opportunity to
use the power of government to rearrange the rules
in their favor. They lobbied for the “free and unlimited coinage of silver at 16:1,” hoping to force the
taxpayers to pay the additional costs for turning the
cheaper silver into coins. Two half-measures were
adopted under silverite pressure: the Bland-Allison
Act of 1878 and the Sherman Silver Purchase Act.
Both bills attempted to force the government to
purchase large quantities of silver at artificially
inflated prices, but each failed to achieve its objective. Neither could purchase nearly enough silver to
affect the market, and neither artificially fixed
prices at a significantly higher level.

287

Gold Standard

The Sherman Act proved disastrous. It required
the government to purchase silver at the price of
161/ 2:1, thus opening a window for speculators
without increasing the quantity of silver in circulation. Domestic and foreign speculators pounced on
the price differential to pour silver into U.S. vaults,
while gold flowed out. The government came close
to bankruptcy before banker J. P. Morgan bailed out
the United States Treasury with a massive loan. This
only further inflamed the anger of those convinced
that industrialists and bankers such as Morgan,
Andrew Carnegie, and John D. Rockefeller controlled the money supply. Somehow, the critics
argued, Morgan, Rockefeller, and the “money trust”
manipulated the economy by its “control” of the
gold standard.
This view, of course, flipped the old Jacksonian
and English “goldsmith” views on their heads: they
had argued that only through a gold standard could
the “common man” be protected against the machinations of “big business” and the “money interests.”
Within a fifty-year period, however, conspiracy theorists—many of them the same voices who had called
for a gold-only standard—now lobbied for a bimetallic standard. Businessmen and bankers favored a
gold standard, not because they controlled it, but
because it was predictable and stable.
The “free silver” movement reached its apex with
the nomination of William Jennings Bryan as the
Democratic candidate for president in 1896. Echoing the conspiracy-theorists’ fears of a “money trust,”
Bryan delivered his famous “Cross of Gold” nomination acceptance speech in which he warned that
shadowy forces were attempting to “crucify mankind” on a “cross of gold.” The Republican, William
McKinley, ran on a gold-only standard (as well as a
“full dinner pail”), and won handily, ending all discussion of bimetallism.
In 1913, the Federal Reserve System was created
as the new “central” bank of the United States, and
it further centralized monetary authority in the
hands of the federal government. As one historian
of U.S. central banking, Richard Timberlake, has
pointed out, there was never any question that the
Federal Reserve would operate under the existing

288

gold standard. However, the deflationary shocks of
the 1920s caused most countries, culminating with
England, to go off the gold standard for international exchanges. That left the United States as the
only major nation still on the gold standard, meaning that people could purchase paper dollars with
paper pounds sterling or francs, then convert dollars to gold. U.S. gold flowed out of the Federal
Reserve’s vaults to Europe, weakening the banking
system, until Franklin Roosevelt took the United
States off gold during the New Deal.
Conspiracy theorists then came full circle again:
Roosevelt was attempting to control the money supply of the United States by eliminating the gold
reserve requirement—precisely what the previous
generation of conspiracy theorists had advocated.
By that time, conspiracy theories had split into two
streams when it came to gold and money. One
stream argued that the Rockefellers, through the
Bank of England (and with the support of the Rothschilds), manipulated the international price of
gold. The other stream claimed that, in line with the
objective of a “one-world government,” the Federal
Reserve served as a tool for the Council on Foreign
Relations, the Trilateral Commission, and the
United Nations to weaken the U.S. economy and
provide convenient inflation for politicians favored
by these groups. Critics such as J. Orlin Grabbe and
Sherman Skolnick have argued that the Federal
Reserve has, at political direction, inflated and deflated the monetary base at critical times.
As the Internet has made electronic money transfers easier, the significance of gold-backing of any
monetary system has faded. Gold prices, except for
a pair of spikes related to oil price increases in the
1970s, have hovered at post–World War II lows.
Despite claims by Grabbe and Skolnick, no Federal
Reserve inflationary “mischief” has resulted in any
substantial gold price increases. Quite the contrary,
during the time that individuals or foreign interests
were supposedly masterminding a massive inflation,
gold prices continued to languish at low levels.
Indeed, to simultaneously manipulate both Federal
Reserve policies for inflation and gold prices is selfcontradictory. If gold is the “ultimate guarantor” of

The Green Corn Rebellion

monetary value, then economic logic suggests that
gold prices would have risen in the case of inflation.
More likely, the Internet has opened up a new era of
genuinely competitive money, although not privately
issued money. Instead, national currencies—the
yen, the ruble, the dollar, the peso, and the euro—
all compete against each other with productivity and
national wealth providing the real guarantor of monetary values.
Larry Schweikart
See also: Federal Reserve System.
References
Clapham, John. 1944. The Bank of England: A
History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fell, James E., Jr. 1990. “The Silver Issue and the
Gold Standard.” Encyclopedia of American
Business and Economic History: Banking and
Finance to 1913, ed. Larry Schweikart. New York:
Facts on File.
Greider, William. 1987. Secrets of the Temple: How
the Federal Reserve Runs the Country. New York:
Simon and Schuster.
Timberlake, Richard H., Jr. 1978. Origins of Central
Banking in the United States. New York and
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
White, Lawrence H. 1984. Free Banking in Britain:
Theory, Experience, and Debate, 1800–1845. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Websites
Home page of J. Orlin Grabbe: http://www.aci.net/
kalliste.
Sherman Skolnick Report: http://www.
skolnicksreport.com/bio.html.

The Green Corn Rebellion
During the season of the Shawnee Green Corn celebration in the summer of 1917, a group of discontented, mostly illiterate, tenant farmers in southeast
central Oklahoma planned to march to Washington,
take over the government, stop U.S. participation in
the war in Europe, and end conscription. Although
signs of the conspiracy were discovered in various
parts of Oklahoma, Texas, and Arkansas, overt acts
of violence were confined to approximately 6,000
square miles, and the majority in half that area in the

four contiguous Oklahoma counties of Seminole,
Pottawatomie, Hughes, and Pontotoc.
Agitators from the Industrial Workers of the
World (IWW), the Working Class Union (WCU),
the Socialist Party, the Jones Family (the poor people’s secret name for their organization), and
Catholic baiters convinced the farmers that at least
2 million others were mobilized, more would join
the cause as they marched east, and the whole
nation would rise up in arms. They called meetings
in the woods, as many as three per week, and promised the farmers two carloads of rifles. They argued
that they shouldn’t be fighting farmers and workers
in Germany, when the real enemies were the capitalists at home.
But it did not take much convincing. Many of the
farmers were suffering from poor soil, from uncontrollable costs of production, transportation, and
storage, from bad weather and insect infestation,
and from an uncertain market. They also saw those
with whom they dealt, the banker and the smalltown merchant, as highly prosperous.
H. H. Rube Munson, a paid IWW organizer, came
to the area to stir up resistance to the draft. Another
IWW professional, J. E. Wiggins, revived the dormant, indigenous Working Class Union and built
upon the strength of the Socialist Party in the area.
He combined socialism and anarchism to foment
draft resistance and inflated the group’s feeling of
strength by numbering membership cards in the
millions, and holding meetings in secret.
But only isolated incidents occurred. Rebels
dynamited the Dewar waterworks on 7 June, resulting in the arrests of nine WCU members, cut the
livestock fences owned by some banks, pulled down
communication lines in Francis and a few other
places, partially burned four bridges, attempted to
blow up the storage tanks of the Magnolia Petroleum Company in McAlester, threatened to destroy
the McAlester Grain and Elevator Plant, and stole
property of some of the wealthy.
The IWW set 2 July for the grand mobilization, but
when the day arrived it was postponed to 3 August.
On 2 August a party of five black WCU members
ambushed Sheriff Frank Grall and his deputy, J. W.

289

Gulf War Syndrome

Cross, in Little River country, south of Seminole.
After wounding Deputy Cross, the farmers fled. That
same night a band of rebels marched from farm to
farm soliciting recruits and camped on a sandbar in
the South Canadian River. The next morning part of
the group tried to destroy the railroad bridge over the
river. About a hundred others, under command of
Captain Bill of the Red Sash, moved to a bluff on Old
Man Spear’s farm, where the owner ran up a red flag
in his backyard and denounced “Big Slick,” President
Woodrow Wilson, for getting the country into war.
When a twenty-five-man posse approached the bluff
the rebels ran into the woods.
The next day nearly 1,000 posse men from seven
counties began the final campaign. Three rebels
were killed, 400 arrested, and 120 indicted for seditious conspiracy and conspiring to obstruct the
Selective Service Act. Three were sentenced to ten
years in prison, two to six years, and a number from
one to four years; 154 pleaded guilty to draft resistance. During the trials authorities set exorbitant bails
and systematically excluded socialists from juries.
The eastern press portrayed the farmers as perpetual renegades who merely used the draft as a
pretext to resist the government. It did not understand the economic plight of the farmers, their real
concern that conscription would lead to their death
in Europe, and their traditional honesty and lawabiding nature.
JeDon A. Emenhiser
References
Bush, Charles C. 1932. The Green Corn Rebellion.
M.A. thesis, University of Oklahoma.
Cunningham, William. 1935. The Green Corn
Rebellion. New York: Vanguard Press.
Emenhiser, JeDon A. 1962. “The Green Corn
Rebellion.” Pp. 316–338 in Armed Politics: An
Analysis and Comparison of Six Cases in the
United States. Ph.D diss., University of
Minnesota.

Gulf War Syndrome
Gulf War Syndrome (GWS; also known as Persian
Gulf Syndrome) is the general term used to describe
a cluster of symptoms, disorders, and diseases,

290

whose common factor is that the victims were veterans of the war in the Persian Gulf in 1990–1991. The
veterans and their families (principally from the
United States, but also from other coalition forces)
have accused the governments involved of subjecting unwitting service personnel to untested chemical weapons or antinerve-gas drugs, and/or covering
up what they know about the issue.
Many Gulf War veterans have reported experiencing a variety of physical symptoms and illnesses
in the years since the Gulf War. Symptoms reported
include nausea, cramps, rashes, short-term memory
loss, fatigue, difficulty in breathing, headaches,
joint and muscle pain, and birth defects. Ailments
have been reported by American, Canadian, Australian, and British veterans alike; in some cases
spouses of veterans have reported similar symptoms. The mysterious syndrome has sparked debate
between veterans’ groups, Senate investigators, and
the military over questions of accountability, treatment, and compensation. Hypothesized causes include parasites, biological and chemical warfare
agents, prophylactic vaccines and medications given
against biological and chemical warfare agents,
fumes from oil well fires, and stress. In 1994 an
advisory panel organized by the National Institutes
of Health reported that the syndrome represented
many illnesses and many causes; they deemed biological and chemical warfare agents unlikely as
causes. Causes for the illnesses in many subsets of
patients have been identified—for example, some
thirty veterans had leishmaniasis, a parasitic disease
spread by sand flies—but in many instances the
cause has not been identified. Veterans groups have
blamed a variety of causes for these disparate GWS
symptoms, including battlefield exposure to toxicants such as chemical weapons, smoke from oil
fires and pesticides, and exposure to such chemicals
and vaccines as the nerve agent sarin, the drug pyridostigmine bromide, depleted uranium, and
anthrax and botulism vaccines.
There is still much debate about whether “Gulf
War Syndrome” exists. In 1999 researchers said that
brain scans of some sick veterans revealed signs of
damage caused by exposure to toxic chemicals,

Gulf War Syndrome

while some medical historians have pointed out that
syndromes of undiagnosable diseases have occurred
after other wars, including the U.S. Civil War and
World Wars I and II.
Niran Abbas
See also: Agent Orange; Health Scares.

References
Eddington, Patrick. 1997. Gassed in the Gulf: The
Inside Story of the Pentagon-CIA Cover-up of
Gulf War Syndrome. Washington, DC: Insignia.
Showalter, Elaine. 1997. Hystories: Hysterical
Epidemics and Modern Culture. New York:
Columbia University Press.

291

H
Hackers
In February 2000, Websites such as Yahoo!, Amazon, eBay, and CNN were shut down by “Denial of
Service” messages that crippled a corner of the
Internet for a three-day period. As it had frequently
done, the media focused upon the much-hyped
computer hacker and professed to shed light on this
dangerous underground. The popular fear is that the
hacker is potentially anybody, including the neighbor’s teenage son or daughter, who, safely ensconced
behind drawn shades or in basement apartments,
could be busily hacking global computer systems.
Such news coverage, however, is nothing new given
that reports of hackers violating government, corporate, and personal databases have become common
currency on the Internet and helped perpetuate a
conspiracy-minded paranoia regarding the ubiquity
of hackers and the vulnerability of Internet users
across the globe. Yet the term “hacker” is problematic because, since its earliest incarnation in the
1950s, it has mutated in the popular media to
include such divergent groups as traditional hackers,
phone phreakers (people who hack into the phone
system), crackers (the label for the less acceptable
forms of hacking), and cypherpunks (those with a
more general, but no less radical, interest in cryptography). In the seminal Hackers: Heroes of the
Computer Revolution (1994), Steven Levy notes
that, as of 1984, there were three distinguishable
generations of hackers. In the late 1950s and early
1960s, the first generation consisted of Peter Samson, Bob Saunders, John McCarthy, Bill Gosper,

Richard Greenblatt, Stewart Nelson, members of
the Tech Railroad Model Club, and a host of other
figures that found themselves wandering through
the early computing labs of MIT. As Levy describes
it, these hackers were drawn to the early computers
housed in MIT’s Research Laboratory of Electronics
and, driven by an overwhelming curiosity, they
experimented with both hardware and software for
the express purpose of pushing the computer
beyond its original programming. They wanted to
create something new, whether through the physical
manipulation of the system or writing programming
language such as FORTRAN, which helped create a
freely distributable precursor of today’s video games:
Spacewar. As a result, a hacker ethic stressing the
free flow of ideas emerged: “Just as information
should be clearly and elegantly transported within a
computer, and just as software should be freely disseminated, hackers believed people should be
allowed access to files or tools which might promote
the hacker quest to find out and improve the way the
world works” (Levy, 102). Contemporary accounts of
hackers continue to stress the ethics of hacking,
whether Paul Taylor in Hackers: Crime in the Digital Sublime (1999), remarking that the true hacker
demonstrates simplicity (simple but impressive
skills), mastery (sophisticated technical knowledge),
and illicitness (the act of hacking is against the rules)
(15); or Pekka Himanen’s summary in The Hacker
Ethic and the Spirit of the Information Age (2001),
that the hacker spirit consists of intrinsic interest,
enthusiasm, and joy (3–4).
293

Hackers

In addition to their common interests, these early
hackers were also united in that they were viewed
by the general population as mages of some weird,
and equally wicked, magic. As the 1950s changed
into the 1960s, resistance to U.S. involvement in
Vietnam, condemnation of military/educational
partnerships, and the value of free love placed these
early hackers in a precarious position. Public image
of these hacking magi fluctuated between the “mad
scientist” type and the geeky “pasty-skinned, glassyeyed automatons” that were the precursor to an
Orwellian Big Brotherism just over the horizon
(Levy, 130). With the advent of the 1970s, hackers
eventually exited the hallowed halls of MIT and
took to the streets to form computer-based clubs
that fostered the hacker ethic by allowing diverse
members to share hacking tips. This second wave of
hackers used home-based transistor kits to explore
the possibilities of creating new computer systems
and social networks “where truth, openness, and
democracy existed in a form purer than one could
find anywhere else” (Levy, 192). Notable among
this second wave were such groups as Community
Memory, set up by Lee Felsenstein and Efrem Lipkin, and the popular Homebrew, founded by Gordon French and Fred Moore. In a shift of the conspiratorial target, this second wave of hackers
returned the conspiratorial gaze outward to express
their own mistrust of those with economic advantage, notably multinational corporations (e.g., IBM)
that threatened to privatize and restrict computer
systems, software, and information.
Tellingly, on 3 February 1976, the Homebrew
Community Club newsletter was set abuzz when a
hacker, in a written letter entitled “An Open Letter
to Hobbyists,” expressed dismay, frustration, and
anger that his BASIC computer software program
had been hacked and freely distributed. The author
of the letter? Microsoft founder Bill Gates. Unfortunately, Gates’s letter was the writing on the wall;
money had come to hackerdom as twenty-three
separate computer companies, including Apple and
Microsoft, were eventually founded out of Homebrew’s members. Yet, as hackers began to compete
with one another in a market that valued shares
over sharing, they became their own conspiratorial
294

targets. This third generation ran afoul of the first
and second generations and, consequently, internal
accusations of corporate espionage, theft, and an
overall betrayal of the hacker spirit ensued.
This internal strife among hackers-cum-corporate-officers intensified during the 1980s when the
home computing market began to grow at exponential rates. Furthermore, fueled by the popularity of
hackers in such venues as movies (War Games), novels (Neuromancer), and television (Max Headroom),
hacking exploded in the public consciousness
because the personal computer potentially allowed
anyone to hack computer systems. Thus, while War
Games was screened nationwide, FBI agents
arrested the six teenage members of the “414
Gang,” a computer club that hacked the Los Alamos
National Laboratory, a site involved in the development of nuclear weapons. Or, in 1987, Shadow
Hawk (Herbert Zinn), admitting to hacking AT&T
computers, became the first to be prosecuted under
the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986.
Finally, to help solidify the growing concern over
hackers, Cornell graduate student Robert Morris
unleashed the first computer worm that “unknowingly” infected computer systems worldwide and
shut down the emergent Internet network. As
Andrew Ross, in Strange Weather: Culture, Science,
and Technology in the Age of Limits (1991), puts it,
the effects of Morris’s Internet virus “helped to generate a moral panic that has all but transformed
everyday ‘computer culture’” (75) while a “[v]irusconscious fear and loathing have clearly fed into the
paranoid climate of privatization that increasingly
defines social identities in the new post-Fordist era”
(80). By the end of the 1980s, the conspiracy dialogue shifted toward a media-hyped condemnation
of hacking—the distinctions among hacking, cracking, and phone phreaking completely ignored—and
the potentially crippling abilities of such computerized cabals as the Legion of Doom or, in West Germany, the Chaos Computer Club. Tellingly, U.S.
Attorney Otto Obermaier called hacking the “crime
of the future . . . [and] this kind of conduct will not
be tolerated” (Slatalla and Quittner).
The judicial pursuit of hackers has only intensified since the 1980s and has now become an

Hackers

increasingly publicized enterprise. For example, in
1990, four members of the Legion of Doom were
arrested for stealing information that could potentially disrupt BellSouth’s 911 emergency system.
Later that year, the Secret Service, operating in the
interest of national security, launched Operation
Sundevil, a cooperative, multijurisdictional search
and seizure operation targeting computer bulletin
boards housed in fourteen cities. Bruce Sterling, in
the online version of The Hacker Crackdown,
writes that “Sundevil appears to have been a complete success. Boards went down all over the
United States, and were shipped en masse to the
computer investigation lab of the Secret Service, in
Washington D.C., along with the 23,000 floppy
disks and unknown quantities of printed material.”
Yet, Sterling argues that Sundevil had little to do
with hacking itself but with media relations, since
it would send a “message” to the digital underground that they could not hide behind the relative
anonymity of their computer terminals for long.
Essentially, the hacker war escalated into the
public domain as businesses used the hacker threat
to market security software. At the same time, law
enforcement agencies publicly brought the more
flamboyant hackers to trial and shifted the cultural
understanding of hackers from the early days of
computer exploration into the realm of computer
theft and fraud. Examples of these cybercriminals
include members of Masters of Deception (Phiber
Optik, Acid Phreak, Scorpion), who broke into such
corporations as AT&T and the Bank of America,
and Kevin Poulsen, who manipulated phone lines in
both Los Angeles and Hawaii to ensure that he won
Porsches and cash from radio giveaway contests.
Conspiracy theorists, however, point to the case
of Kevin Mitnick as the most public example of government/corporate manipulation of the hacking
image. In trouble with the law since his hacking
teenage years, Mitnick, over a two-year period,
became the FBI’s most wanted hacker of the 1990s
after allegedly hacking into computers, stealing corporate secrets, scrambling phone networks, and
breaking into the national defense warning system.
Foiled by security specialist Tsutomu Shimomura,
Mitnick was arrested in 1995 after eluding authori-

ties for several years. Mitnick spent over four years
in jail prior to his trial, prompting biographer
Jonathan Littman to remark that “the government
made it clear that they might indict him in different
jurisdictions [and] that he might have to face multiple trials. He did not get the evidence against him
for a very long time. The only trial Kevin Mitnick
got was in the New York Times and in the media.”
Most observers argue that Mitnick, while certainly
responsible for some of his deeds (he signed a plea
agreement in 1995), could not have carried out all
his attributed hacks and was unjustly prosecuted in
favor of the positive media spin that increasingly
depicted hackers in criminal/terrorist terms. Given
the climate of the 1990s, Littman remarks that
“there was more at stake at that time. And I think
Mitnick, for the media and for some in the government, made a great scapegoat and was a great sort
of boogeyman.”
Even Levy, in the 1994 edition of Hackers, states
that the noble stature of the early hackers has been
deleted by this fourth branch of media-hyped hacker,
a figure “rooted in the vernacular . . . [and] synonymous with the ‘digital trespasser.’ . . . In the past few
years, with the emergence of computer viruses, the
hacker has been literally transformed into a virulent
force” (432). Unfortunately, the term has fared no
better in recent years, evidenced in the “Denial of
Service” attacks of 2000 or, a few years earlier, the
1998 penetration of the Pentagon’s unclassified computer networks and, in 1999, the vandalization of the
U.S. Senate, White House, and U.S. Army websites.
Critics contend that such hacks continue to feed into
the conspiratorial paranoia that accompanies average
computer users regarding the malevolent computer
hacker lurking over the digital horizon, which only
helps sway public opinion toward increased policing
of the Internet and the ongoing development (and
purchase) of security software.
Graham J. Murphy
References
Himanen, Pekka. 2001. The Hacker Ethic and the
Spirit of the Information Age. New York: Random
House.
Levy, Steven. 1994 [1984]. Hackers: Heroes of the
Computer Revolution. New York: Penguin.

295

Hamilton, Alexander

Littman, Jonathan. 2002. Interview. Hackers:
Computer Outlaws. TLC: The Learning Channel,
9 January.
Ross, Andrew. 1991. Strange Weather: Culture,
Science, and Technology in the Age of Limits.
London: Verso.
Slatalla, Michelle, and Joshua Quittner. 1994. “Gang
War in Cyberspace.” Wired, December. http://
www.wired.com/wired/archive/2.12/hacker_pr.
html.
Sterling Bruce. 1994. Hacker Crackdown: Law and
Disorder on the Electronic Frontier. http://www.
lysator.liu.se/etexts/hacker.
Taylor, Paul. 1999. Hackers: Crime in the Digital
Sublime. New York: Routledge.

Hamilton, Alexander
In the early 1790s Alexander Hamilton, then secretary of the treasury, was accused of conspiring to turn
the American Republic into a monarchy. The origin
of that theory can be dated, fairly specifically, to April
1791 and a dinner engagement between Hamilton,
Thomas Jefferson (then secretary of state), and John
Adams (then vice-president). In the course of a conversation on political subjects Adams remarked that
the British Constitution “would be the most perfect
constitution ever devised by the wit of man” if only it
were purged of its corruption and if the House of
Commons had equality of representation. Hamilton
responded with sentiments derived from one of his
favorite political writers, David Hume: “purge it of its
corruption, and give to its popular branch equality of
representation, and it would become an impracticable government: as it stands at present, with all its
supposed defects, it is the most perfect government
which ever existed.” Jefferson was horrified by
Hamilton’s declaration and from that moment purportedly believed that Hamilton was “not only a
monarchist” but that he preferred “a monarchy bottomed on corruption” and, furthermore, Jefferson
believed that Hamilton was actively conspiring to
erect such a system in the United States (Sawvel,
36–37).
Jefferson and Madison (who had come to think
like him) began to see evidence of Hamilton’s conspiring ways in many of his writings and actions,
past and present. Hamilton’s fiscal policy in partic296

Alexander Hamilton. (Library of Congress)

ular, a policy that aimed to concentrate wealth at
the national level by assuming debt through a
national bank, was characterized as an elaborate
ploy designed to deprive the U.S. people of their
liberty. As the Republican Party began to coalesce
around Jefferson and Madison, Hamilton was portrayed in the popular press as the head of a “Royal
Faction” intent on ending Republican government.

Harding, Warren G.

Rumors spread in newspapers that Hamilton was
plotting to have the Duke of Kent, a son of George
II, crowned as king of the United States. The
National Gazette, a paper published in Philadelphia
by Philip Freneau (with the backing of Madison and
Jefferson), fanned the flames of suspicion, by painting Hamilton as an advocate for monarchy and aristocracy. In May 1791, Jefferson assembled his evidence of Hamilton’s conspiracy and presented it to
President George Washington, charging that Hamilton’s scheme was to “prepare the way for a change
from the present republican form of government to
that of a monarchy” (Ford, vol. 1, 200). Washington
did not believe a word of this and pressed for an end
to the accusations. Learning from Washington of the
charges against him, Hamilton defended himself in
a long letter in which he argued that the real conspirators were his accusers. Hamilton later spoke of
the “unkind whispers” (Syrett, vol. 12, 347) leveled
against him and maintained that the “real threat to
republicanism came not from Madison and Jefferson’s imagined group of monarchists and aristocrats,
but rather from the disorder and anarchy that would
result from the destruction or lessening of the influence of the national government.” Hamilton summarized the issue in a fairly accurate way when he
wrote: “One side appears to believe that there is a
serious plot to overturn the state Governments and
substitute monarchy to the present republican system. The other side firmly believes that there is a
serious plot to overturn the General Government &
elevate the separate power of the states upon its
ruins. Both sides may be equally wrong & their
mutual jealousies may be materially causes of the
appearances which mutually disturb them, and
sharpen them against each other” (Syrett, vol. 12,
253). Washington rightly considered the “wounding
suspicions, and irritating charges” (Boyd, vol. 24,
317) of conspiracy and counterconspiracy to be
harmful to the harmony of the early American
Republic, but he was unable to bring the parties
together.
Mark G. Spencer
See also: Anti-Federalists; Disunion, Fears of;
Hartford Convention; Jefferson, Thomas.

References
Boyd, Julian P., et al., eds. 1950–. The Papers of
Thomas Jefferson. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Brookhiser, Richard. 1999. Alexander Hamilton:
American. New York: The Free Press.
Christman, Margaret C. S. 1992. “The Spirit of
Party”: Hamilton and Jefferson at Odds.
Washington, DC: National Portrait Gallery,
Smithsonian Institution Press.
Elkins, Stanley, and Eric McKitrick. 1993. The Age
of Federalism: The Early American Republic,
1788–1800. New York: Oxford University Press.
Ford, Paul Leicester, ed. 1892–1899. The Writings of
Thomas Jefferson. 10 vols. New York: Putnam’s.
McDonald, Forrest. 1979. Alexander Hamilton: A
Biography. New York: Norton.
Sawvel, Franklin B., ed. 1903. The Complete Anas of
Thomas Jefferson. New York: The Round Table
Press.
Syrett, Harold C., et al., eds. 1961–1979. The Papers
of Alexander Hamilton. 26 vols. New York:
Columbia University Press.

Harding, Warren G.
Warren Gamaliel Harding, twenty-ninth president
of the United States, died in a San Francisco hotel
room on the evening of 2 August 1923. The sudden
end to his brief, unhappy administration, and the
refusal of First Lady Florence Harding to permit an
autopsy, fueled subsequent rumors of foul play and
cast a retrospective shadow over the president’s
final days. It has been suggested that Harding committed suicide, or might even have been murdered,
in order to avoid imminent revelations of scandal
that could have resulted in his impeachment and
removal from office.
Within months of his death, some of the president’s key associates, including Attorney General
Harry Daugherty, Interior Secretary Albert Fall,
and the Veterans Bureau chief, Charles Forbes,
were mired in the Teapot Dome oil lease investigations. Teapot Dome was America’s worst experience
of political scandal before Watergate and has since
become a catchall term to describe the illegal sale
of government oil lands in Wyoming for profit,
along with other, loosely linked cases of fraud,
embezzlement, and bribery by Harding’s cronies—
the men who constituted “The Ohio Gang” who followed the new president to Washington in 1921.
297

Harding, Warren G.

Casket of Warren G. Harding being carried from the doorway of the White House to be placed on a caisson and taken to
the Capitol. (Library of Congress)

Harding himself is not thought to have been personally involved and probably knew little or nothing
of the corruption within his government until mid1923. The dawning realization, however, was known
to have deeply troubled him. Embarking on a tour
of the western United States to promote U.S. membership of the World Court, Harding exhausted
himself by insisting on a punishing schedule of public appearances. After his collapse in Seattle, the
rest of the tour was canceled on Florence Harding’s
orders and the president was rushed through to the
Palace Hotel in San Francisco. At first, his condi298

tion seemed to improve but, on the evening of 2
August, as his wife read to him a favorable news
article from the Saturday Evening Post, the president suffered a relapse and died.
Conspiracy theorists have had plenty of material to
work with in the case of Warren Harding. Conflicting
accounts of the exact time of the president’s death, its
exact cause, and the number and identity of persons
in the presidential suite at the time, aroused suspicion among reporters, as did Florence Harding’s
refusal to allow an autopsy. The former first lady later
destroyed many of her husband’s personal papers,

Harding, Warren G.

while the rest were closed to historians for forty
years. This generated fresh rumors that she, or her
husband, had something to hide. In the absence of
detailed, academic analyses of the president and his
administration, the way was left open for less reliable
commentators to fashion Harding’s image and place
in history. In 1930, Gaston Means, a private investigator and convicted perjurer, published The Strange
Death of President Harding, alleging that Florence
Harding had confessed to administering an overdose
to her husband, with his tacit complicity, during his
illness in San Francisco. Her aim, she told Means,
was to spare him the humiliation of impeachment.
Harding apparently understood what she was doing
as the fatal dose was administered and accepted it as
his sole means of escape from onrushing disaster.
Means also confirmed the claim of Nan Britton’s
1926 memoir, The President’s Daughter, that she had
been Harding’s mistress and had borne his child.
Jealousy of Harding’s philandering, Means wrote,
had driven Mrs. Harding to employ private detectives to keep track of his extracurricular activities.
Popular fiction later took up these promising
themes of adultery, scandal, and petty espionage. In
the 1926 play Revelry, Samuel Hopkins Adams’s
pastiche of the Harding years, the failed “president”
Willis Markham commits suicide to avoid humiliation. In Gore Vidal’s Hollywood (1989), much is
made of Florence Harding’s 1920 visit to noted
Washington astrologer Madame Marcia, who had
famously predicted in 1920 Harding’s election and
premature death. Vidal, however, has Marcia
prophesying the president’s murder.
The rumor mill ground on for four decades. While
Harding’s philandering nature has been confirmed
by most scholars of the period, there exists no clear
evidence to substantiate the wilder rumors of presidential murder. The most likely explanation for
Harding’s death is that of sheer nervous exhaustion,
exacerbating an already dangerous heart condition.
Two recent Harding analysts, Robert Ferrell (1996)
and Carl Sferrazza Anthony (1998), support the theory of death from natural causes. Anthony adds an
extra dimension by speculating that the homeopathic remedies practiced on the president by Dr.
Charles Sawyer may have been a significant contrib-

utory factor to Harding’s sudden death at a time
when he had appeared to be on the road to recovery.
Ferrell and Anthony point to a postmortem disagreement between Sawyer and other medical
experts as to the cause of Harding’s death. Anthony
suggests that the real cause of death—a fatal heart
attack brought on by strong purgatives that were
administered relentlessly by Sawyer and weakened
the president’s condition—was covered up in order
to protect Sawyer’s reputation. Anthony claims that
although the death was innocent and accidental, it
was nevertheless a case of negligent homicide.
By 1923, Harding biographer Francis Russell
records, the president was overweight and suffering
from high blood pressure. He could no longer complete his customary rounds of golf and had to be
propped up in bed at night due to breathing difficulties. The intense physical exertions of the western tour, therefore, combined with overwhelming
fear over the rumors of scandal now reaching his
ears, were probably more than sufficient to bring
about his collapse and death without murderous
assistance from his wife. The recent “accidental
death” scenario propounded by Anthony is perhaps
more plausible.
Despite this, the rumors of conspiracy have
never entirely been silenced. Interpretations of the
Harding years have been dominated more by hostile journalists, gossip, and popular fiction than by
serious historical analysis and this has given the
entire period an “unbalanced” character, in which
the focus has been almost entirely upon the president’s love life, his wife’s addiction to clairvoyants,
and his associates’ thievery. In such a lurid environment, murder conspiracy theories thrive. The facts
are insufficient to sustain such theories but, in the
case of President Harding, the justifying principle
appears to be not that presidential murder took
place, but that, given the surreal nature of the
Harding era, it would not have been surprising.
Niall Palmer
References
Adams, Samuel H. 1926. Revelry. New York: Boni
and Liveright.
Anthony, Carl S. 1998. Florence Harding: The First
Lady, the Jazz Age and the Death of America’s

299

Hartford Convention

Most Scandalous President. New York: William
Morrow and Company.
Ferrell, Robert H. 1996. The Strange Death of
President Harding. Columbia, MO: University of
Missouri Press.
Gold, Glenn David. 2001. Carter Beats the Devil.
London: Hodder and Stoughton.
Means, Gaston B. 1930. The Strange Death of
President Harding. New York: Gold Label Books,
Inc.
Russell, Francis. 1969. President Harding: His Life
and Times, 1865–1923. London: Eyre and
Spottiswoode.
Vidal, Gore 1991. Hollywood. London: Grafton
Books.

Hartford Convention
Between 15 December 1814 and 5 January 1815,
twenty-six Federalist delegates from the New
England states met in Hartford, Connecticut, to
consider their future as members of the United
States. New England Federalists increasingly feared
a southern/Republican conspiracy to weaken the
northern region and subjugate it to the Republican
agenda. Concerted, forceful action by the New
England states seemed imperative. To concerned
New England observers, “Mr. Madison’s War” of
1812–1815 and the hardships it imposed on the
region demonstrated the extent of anti–New
England conspiracy. By 1814, the scattered calls for
a convention of New England states to resist subjugation reached a fever pitch Federalist leaders could
no longer ignore. New England fears of conspiracy
thus prompted action that in turn engendered
Republican fears of Federalist conspiracy to break
apart the union.
Sectionalism and Partisanship
Fears of conspiracy grew out of vigorous sectional
jealousies and partisan politics. Even before the
1787 Constitutional Convention, political leaders
and observers had noted the differences of climate,
geography, economy, religion, and custom that differentiated New England, the Mid-Atlantic, the
South, and the West from each other. The interests
of one region often conflicted with those of the others, and ratification of the 1787 Constitution in no
300

way dispelled perceptions of regional incompatibility. Throughout the decades of the early Republic,
any attempt to enhance the interests of one region
usually brought accusations from other regions of
conspiracy to strengthen one part of the country at
the others’ expense.
Adding to the sectional tension, partisan politics
quickly emerged during George Washington’s presidency and intensified under his successors. In the
new system of government, political opposition had
not yet gained legitimacy and was seen as conspiratorial by definition. The Federalist Party, based in
New York and New England, supported Alexander
Hamilton’s program of economic and commercial
development and his pro-British, elitist attitudes.
Republicans, led by Virginians Thomas Jefferson
and James Madison, preferred French friendship,
and advocated agricultural individualism and the
democratization of politics. Federalists, the party in
power under Washington and Adams, feared that
Republicans would gain ascendancy in the state and
federal elections of 1800. In an attempt to suppress
“treasonous” Republicans, Federalists passed the
Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798. In turn Republicans, who perceived Federalists as the true conspirators, responded with the Virginia and Kentucky
Resolutions that labeled the acts unconstitutional.
Jefferson’s election in 1800 and other Republican
victories reversed the parties’ political fortunes,
putting Federalists on the defensive. Shrinking to a
political minority, New England Federalists perceived even more dangerous conspiratorial designs
by the opposition.
Foreign affairs only exacerbated the sectional
and partisan disputes. As warfare between France
and Great Britain resumed in the first decade of the
nineteenth century, both sides preyed upon U.S.
shipping to prevent New World resources from
reaching each other. Jefferson and his successor,
Madison, attempted to coerce the combatants into
respecting U.S. neutrality by denying them the
advantages of U.S. trade until they ceased harassment of U.S. ships. Their trade embargoes, however, greatly curtailed economic activity in New
England, which had always relied on its commercial
relationships, especially with Britain. It seemed to

Hartford Convention

Charles’s satire attacks the Hartford Convention, a series of secret meetings of New England Federalists held in
December 1814. The artist caricatures radical secessionist leader Timothy Pickering and lampoons the inclinations
toward secession by convention members Rhode Island, Massachusetts, and Connecticut, alleging encouragement from
English King George III. In the center, on a shore kneels Timothy Pickering, with hands clasped praying, “I Strongly
and most fervently pray for the success of this great leap which will change my vulgar name into that of my Lord of
Essex. God save the King.” On a precipice above him, a man, representing Massachusetts, pulls two others (Rhode
Island and Connecticut) toward the edge. Rhode Island: “Poor little I, what will become of me? this leap is of a frightful
size—I sink into despondency.” Connecticut: “I cannot Brother Mass; let me pray and fast some time longer—little
Rhode will jump the first.” Massachusetts: “What a dangerous leap!!! but we must jump Brother Co. (Library of
Congress)

New Englanders that the southern, Republican
conspiracy to weaken their region and party was
rapidly gathering momentum.
The War of 1812 and the
Hartford Convention
To many New England Federalists, the decision in
1812 to go to war with their primary trading partner,
Britain, instead of France, seemed arbitrary and discriminatory. They viewed the war as much more
than the Republicans’ callous disregard for New
England interests. Already becoming a minority in
the federal government, due to expansion in the
southwest and the three-fifths clause of the Consti-

tution that used slave population to increase southern representation in Congress, New England states
feared that the South would subjugate their interests
to enhance its own. With Madison’s election in 1808
and his continuation of Jefferson’s policies, many
New Englanders, unable to repeal Jefferson’s
embargo due to their diminished proportion in Congress, believed they were being increasingly subjected to the “Virginia interest.”
Sporadic calls for a convention of New England
states began well before the outbreak of war. By
late 1814, with yet another embargo in place and
the British threatening the northeastern region,
the state governments of New England could no
301

Hawaii, Attempted U.S. Takeover of

longer resist constituent pressure and, led by Massachusetts, scheduled a convention for that winter.
The moderate Federalist Party leadership intended the convention as a forceful means of petitioning the federal government and an attempt to
contain more radical Federalist sentiment. But
when Federalists demanded constitutional reform
to protect their beleaguered region, Republicans
and their Virginian party leadership perceived an
attempt to break up the union. Just as New Englanders feared a conspiracy to subjugate them to
southern interests, southerners saw the Hartford
Convention as a vehicle for New England secession. As early as 1809 inconclusive evidence linked
New England Federalists to a British plot to separate and perhaps retake the region. Since Jefferson’s election in 1800, the hard-core Federalist
Timothy Pickering of Massachusetts had periodically advocated a separate New England confederacy. And, while Federalist leadership proclaimed
their unionist sentiment and moderate intentions,
the popular mood in New England tended toward
radicalism, and scattered but insistent calls for a
separate peace with Britain or outright secession
fed southern fears of disunionist conspiracy.
In actuality, the convention held to a moderate
course. The twenty-six delegates came from Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rhode Island, two individual New Hampshire counties, and one county of
Vermont. Their final report highlighted the need for
the region’s defense, criticized the developments
that had reduced its influence in the federal government, and suggested correctives for the situation.
The convention proposed seven constitutional
amendments that included abolition of the threefifths clause, raising the voting majority necessary to
admit new states to two-thirds, limits on the federal
government’s war and embargo powers, and an
injunction against successive presidents from the
same state.
Despite the moderate aims of the convention,
Federalists could not shake their reputation as secessionists, and amidst the nationalism that swelled
after Andrew Jackson’s decisive victory at New
Orleans, Federalist influence outside the state of
Massachusetts evaporated. The Federalist proposals
302

ultimately came to nothing, and contrary to its
detractors’ assertions, the Hartford Convention did
not further disunionist conspiracy but rather diffused and contained secessionist sentiment. However, it also demonstrated the depth of suspicion of
both New Englanders and southern Republicans
that the other was conspiring against them.
Cheryl Collins
See also: Alien and Sedition Acts; Anti-Federalists;
Disunion, Fears of.
References
Banner, James M. 1970. To the Hartford
Convention: The Federalists and the Origins of
Party Politics in Massachusetts, 1789–1815. New
York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Knox, J. Wendell. 1966. Conspiracy in American
Politics, 1787–1815. New York: Arno Press.
Stagg, J.C.A. 1983. Mr. Madison’s War: Politics,
Diplomacy, and Warfare in the Early American
Republic, 1783–1830. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

Hawaii, Attempted U.S. Takeover of
The U.S. political and economic agenda to dominate
Hawaii accelerated in 1867–1868. Due to the high
tariffs levied by the United States on imported
Hawaiian sugar, both countries sought closer economic ties. Two options were being considered to
improve relations. On an official level, negotiations
for a Reciprocity Treaty were under way between
Charles Coffin Harris, the envoy representing King
Kamehameha V’s government, and General Edward
Moody McCook, the former U.S. consul to Hawaii.
Yet, a simultaneous push for annexation was also
gaining support among disgruntled U.S. residents.
One catalyst that contributed to the worsening relations was the navy’s decision to dispatch the USS
Lackawanna to Hawaii, where ship and crew were
under orders to remain permanently. Screening this
deployment of troops as a response to a threat of
French aggression, the United States insisted that
the ship was there only to protect U.S. interests and
its citizens. Arriving on 9 February 1867, the Lackawanna anchored in Honolulu Harbor, and its presence posed a serious challenge to the independence
of the Hawaiian kingdom. If the U.S. had been sen-

Hawaii, Attempted U.S. Takeover of

sitive to the fragile relations between the two countries, the navy would have no doubt limited the
duration of the orders, or at least sent another captain. William Reynolds, the captain of the Lackawanna, was persona non grata in Hawaii. He had
been stationed in the islands between 1852 and
1861 and had earned the reputation of being an
annexationist. His return to Honolulu at the helm of
a fully manned vessel of war with instructions to
remain there indefinitely was cause for concern,
especially since many resident Americans as well as
the administration of President Andrew Johnson
favored annexation over reciprocity. U.S. expansionist plans in the Pacific region became evident in the
summer of 1867 when Reynolds sailed the Lackawanna west and on 28 August claimed Midway
Island.
In early 1868, George W. Lendeveg disclosed that
a conspiracy to take over Hawaii was in the works.
As captain’s clerk, Lendeveg was privy to classified
documents as well as the private writings and personal correspondence of Reynolds. Motivated by
the need to find a financial solution to his own personal problems, Lendeveg broke his oath of allegiance to the U.S. Navy when he drafted a letter to
the king in which he promised to furnish information that would prove Reynolds was plotting against
the monarch. Lendeveg pledged loyalty to Kamehameha and offered his services as a spy to uncover
the machinations of the conspirators; however, he
made it clear that he expected to be rewarded for his
role in saving the kingdom. Alarmed at the extent of
the conspiratorial network, Lendeveg counseled the
king that even his most intimate advisors were not to
be trusted and insisted on delivering the evidence in
person. Since the future of the nation might be at
stake, a ministerial-level interview with Attorney
General Stephen H. Phillips was arranged. Unsatisfied that his tale of subterfuge had been adequately
addressed at this meeting with the king’s intermediaries, Lendeveg wrote another letter warning that
the crisis was at hand. Arguing that urgency was
paramount if the kingdom was to be saved, Lendeveg revealed the names of those who had been
beguiled by Reynolds and were now recommending
revolution and annexation by the United States.

After evaluating the evidence Lendeveg had stolen
from Captain Reynolds, Charles de Varigny, the
minister of foreign affairs, informed Washington of
Lendeveg’s treasonous activities and forwarded
copies of the two seditious letters to Secretary of
State William Seward.
Even though the Reciprocity Treaty was ratified
by the Hawaiian Legislature, it was rejected by the
U.S. Senate. The setback halted all progress on a
closer economic union at this time. What about the
threat of annexation? Hawaii had failed to gain the
much-coveted elimination of tariffs on its sugar
exports, but its diplomatic maneuvering preserved
the nation’s independence. Official disclosure of
Lendeveg’s treachery made the conspiracy to annex
the islands public knowledge, and this prevented
Reynolds and the U.S. government from moving unilaterally. On 6 May 1868, the Lackawanna departed
Honolulu and sailed for San Francisco. Once there,
George Lendeveg was court-martialed and sentenced to fines and ten years’ hard labor. The sentence was subsequently reduced by Rear Admiral
H. K. Thatcher and later commuted by the attorney
general. Theft of private correspondences and official documents, which may have exposed a U.S.backed plot to incite revolution in a sovereign state,
and the handing over of those documents to a foreign
government are treasonous activities, yet Lendeveg’s
punishment for these actions was expunged. By
exonerating Lendeveg, the United States cleansed
itself of all involvement in a conspiracy that, now,
officially never existed.
David Zmijewski
References
Carpenter, Edmund James. 1899. America in
Hawaii: A History of the U.S. Influence in the
Hawaiian Islands. Boston, MA: Small, Maynard
and Company.
Kuykendall, Ralph S. 1953. The Hawaiian Kingdom:
1854–1874 Twenty Critical Years. Vol. 2.
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Lendeveg, George W. 1868. Honolulu. Letter to
Kamehameha V. 12 February. Microfilm.
Hawaiian Legation. 1 February 1847–26
December 1885.
———. 1868. Honolulu. Copy of Letter to
Kamehameha V. 21 April. Microfilm. Hawaiian

303

Haymarket Bombing

Legation. 1 February 1847–26 December
1885.
Patterson, John. 1938. “The United States and
Hawaiian Reciprocity, 1867–1870.” Pacific
Historical Review 7: 14–26.

Haymarket Bombing
On 3 May 1886 a striker protesting outside the
McCormick Harvester Company in Chicago was
killed by the police. On 4 May in the city’s Haymarket Square, a small crowd of socialist and anarchist
demonstrators who had gathered to protest the
killing was dispersing when a bomb was thrown at
the police, killing one officer and wounding several
others. In the hysteria that followed, newspapers in
Chicago and across the United States blamed anarchist groups for the bombing, wealthy businessmen
in Chicago donated money to hire “sympathetic witnesses,” and eight men—August Spies, Samuel
Fielden, Michael Schwab, Adolph Fischer, George
Engel, Louis Lingg, Albert Parsons, and Oscar
Neebe—were charged with conspiracy to commit
murder and riot. During the trial the state produced
evidence for the existence of a “Monday Night Conspiracy,” alleging the defendants had met together at
Griefs Hall in Chicago, as part of a larger gathering
of local anarchist groups, to discuss the Haymarket
meeting and lay plans for the bombing.
That a group made up of mainly foreign-born
anarchists should find itself arraigned on conspiracy
charges in Chicago in 1886 remains one of the more
compelling metaphors for the age. The closing
decades of the nineteenth century were among the
most turbulent in modern U.S. history, and no city
felt the transformations of the time more keenly than
Chicago. To some Americans the future of the republic itself seemed in question, as economic depression
and a widening conflict between capital and labor
laid bare the social divisions and political tensions of
the post–Civil War era. In the years leading up to the
Haymarket “conspiracy” industrial conflict intensified, with almost 700,000 workers on strike in 1886,
the year of the Haymarket bombing. By the end of
the decade nearly 10,000 lockouts and strikes had

304

taken place. The 1880s had also seen the rise of a new
nativist response to shifting patterns in immigration
to the United States, as groups of white “native-born”
Americans in cities across the country preached the
dangers of nonassimilation, and the cancerous presence of “alien” political ideologies. The aftermath of
the Haymarket bombing was not a good time to be
a known anarchist in Chicago. Neither was it a good
time to be a foreign-born U.S. worker.
Negligible Evidence for Conspiracy Charges
Problems during jury selection for the trial of the
Haymarket “bombers” indicated from an early
stage that the “conspirators” might themselves be
the victims of a conspiracy to convict innocent men.
Confronted with potential jurors who said they
would be unable to act impartially, having already
formed an opinion on the case from what they had
read or heard, Judge Joseph E. Gary repeatedly
struck down objections from the defense about the
unsuitability of jurors. Gary interviewed many of
those available for selection at such length that
some are said to have simply given in and rediscovered their “impartiality” under duress. The case for
the prosecution rested to a large degree on the testimony of an expert witness who claimed that the
bomb thrown at Haymarket bore a resemblance to
other bombs made by the defendant Louis Lingg.
But prosecutors were unable to prove that Lingg
had either thrown the Haymarket bomb or conspired to do so. A key witness for the prosecution,
Harry Gilmer, offered damning testimony in support of the conspiracy charges, and identified a
Rudolph Schnaubelt as the man who had thrown
the bomb. But Schnaubelt had already been
arrested and released without charge, Gilmer’s evidence in court conflicted with the description of the
bomber he had given to the Chicago Times, and the
defense alleged that he had been paid by the police
to testify. The defense also established that August
Spies could not, contrary to Harry Gilmer’s evidence, have lit the fuse for the bomb. Indeed, the
evidence against all but two of the “conspirators”
was negligible. A number of the accused were
shown to have been elsewhere at the time of the

Haymarket Bombing

A bomb explodes as police battle rioters in Haymarket Square in Chicago on 4 May 1886. The explosion killed several
people. (Library of Congress)

bombing, while others were unaware that the Haymarket meeting had even been planned.
Despite the gravity of the charges, and the huge
volume of evidence presented during the trial, the
jury took only three hours to convict all eight defendants, seven of whom, including Spies, Parsons, and
Lingg, were sentenced to death. A number of
appeals against the sentences were lodged in 1886
and 1887, including one made to the State Supreme
Court of Illinois that contested both the legal and
factual basis of the “conspiracy” convictions. The
appeals failed. Lingg committed suicide before the
sentence could be carried out, but Parsons, Spies,

Fischer, and Engel were hanged on 11 November
1887. Neebe, Fielden, and Schwab were jailed for
life, but were pardoned by the governor of Illinois,
John Altgeld, in 1893.
David Holloway
See also: Alien and Sedition Acts; American
Protective Association; Anarchists; Eugenics; KnowNothings; Molly Maguires; Nativism; Red Scare.
References
Foner, Philip. 1969. The Autobiographies of the
Haymarket Martyrs. New York: Humanities Press.
Schneirov, Richard. 1998. Labor and Urban Politics:
Class Conflict and the Origins of Modern

305

Health Scares

Liberalism in Chicago, 1864–97. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.
Trachtenberg, Alan. 1982. The Incorporation of
America: Culture and Society in the Gilded Age.
New York: Hill and Wang.

Health Scares
Disease, medical practice, and public health have
long been subjects of conspiratorial allegations. Historians of earlier centuries typically link such suspicions to the vulnerability of a social order threatened
by instability or war, and to the mysteriousness of illness prior to the age of “scientific medicine.” At the
turn of the twenty-first century, key discoveries and
treatments have transformed medicine, and the
public is bombarded with a constant stream of
health-related information carried by the media.
But despite these advances in knowledge and access
to information, health-related conspiracy theories
proliferated in the second half of the twentieth century. It may be that, in a culture saturated with medical information, the body’s uncertainties and vulnerabilities are pervasive and prominent. Medical
conspiracy theories also reflect rising suspicion
toward and resentment of the medical establishment, which, since the mid-nineteenth century, is
increasingly prestigious, powerful, and rich.
Historical Precedents
Contagion was recognized long before microbes
were identified. Notable conspiracy theories of the
seventeenth to nineteenth centuries blamed disease
on infection by foreign enemies or domestic aliens.
During the Salem witchcraft scare that culminated
in the trials of 1692–1693, routine forms of disease
and death were said to be the work of witches, but
far more fearsome than familiar diseases were the
special “afflictions” caused by demonic possession—
screaming fits, visions, pains—which were considered highly contagious. Historians stress that the
witch-hunt was preceded by a series of disrupting
calamities, including drought, floods, smallpox, and
Indian wars, and that it took place during a hiatus in
governmental and legal authority.
306

The Philadelphia yellow fever epidemic of 1793
occurred during the vulnerable early republican
period, which was characterized by fear of a French
invasion. Faced with the epidemic, Philadelphia
doctors speculated that the recent flood of
Caribbean immigrants into the city had brought a
French contagion with them, possibly as part of a
deliberate French plot.
A foreign enemy also figured in a prominent conspiracy theory about the Great Flu pandemic that
coincided with World War I. Spurred by media stories revealing a German conspiracy to spread contagion through Bayer aspirin tablets, public health
authorities formally investigated the imported medicine.
The Growth of the MedicalIndustrial-Governmental Complex
A decisive step in the formation of the modern
medical establishment was the founding of the
American Medical Association (AMA) in 1847,
which capped decades of struggle to transform a
diverse, unregulated array of practices and practitioners into an exclusive, credentialed profession.
Resistance to professionalizatin, which was widespread in the nineteenth century, was collectively
known as the Popular Health Movement (PHM).
Like its post-1970 descendant, the Alternative
Health Movement, the PHM comprised a diverse
array of supporters who shared distrust or outright
paranoia toward legitimate medical authority.
Today, the split between the profession and the
public is more pronounced than ever: the AMA is
reputedly the strongest and richest lobby in Washington, while the Alternative Health Movement has
grown into an institution in its own right.
The growth of “scientific medicine” in the early
twentieth century decisively divided the layperson
from the expert. Scientific medicine based medical
practice on laboratory research and credentialed
expertise acquired through long, costly years of training at a shrinking number of medical schools that
were selectively endowed by the Rockefeller and
Carnegie Trusts. In the mid-twentieth century, the
growth of related chemical, pharmaceutical, technological, and service industries brought an ever-

Health Scares

increasing involvement of private interests and funding into academic, research, and clinical medicine.
Beginning with the Pure Food Act of 1906, the
U.S. government has formally intertwined itself
with healthcare and health policy. Since 1970,
Washington has spun out a vast web of healthrelated agencies and centers, including the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, the Environmental
Protection Agency, and the agencies that operate
within the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, which include the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the National Institutes of
Health. Through these organizations, the government has become involved in all aspects of healthrelated delivery, licensing, regulation, funding, policy, research, education, and publicity.
The healthcare sector absorbs a vast amount of the
national economy, having accounted for 14 percent of
the gross domestic product in 2001. Although more
money goes into healthcare, the systems that deliver
it are breaking down. Doctors blame unregulated,
price-fixing insurance companies; insurance companies blame price-fixing by consolidating hospitals and
the steep rises in drug and technology costs. The
healthcare consumer, meanwhile, faces enormous
cost spikes and decreasing access to quality care.
At the turn of the twenty-first century, government, business, and universities share funding, research projects, clinical facilities, and oversight personnel; industry and giant philanthropic trusts
support education and research; and public relations
firms work with industry-supported scientific experts
to feed information to the media. Although medicine
has always been political in the broad sense—a
source and use of power—by the end of the twentieth century medicine was a major facet of the power
structure. Faced with this conglomerate of intersecting interests, many healthcare consumers voice the
perception that individual and collective bodily wellbeing calls for a power struggle against fraud,
exploitation, manipulation, and coercion.

cine. The Rockefeller conspiracy theory, which was
promulgated in the mid-twentieth century (Bealle),
alleges that in the 1930s Rockefeller petroleum and
financial interests merged with the infamous Nazitainted German chemical company I. G. Farben to
form an international drug trust, which went on to
control many banks and industries and to direct
education, policy, and research through gifts to
agencies and universities. This theory, because of its
emphasis on Rothschild funding and media monopoly, is usually considered antisemitic. A later elaboration asserts that Rockefeller interests financed the
“green revolution” to develop super-profitable
“superwheat” hybrids that require large amounts of
fertilizer, herbicides, and pesticides (commodities
controlled by Rockefeller), enabling Rockefeller
drug and medical interests to profit from resulting
increases in environmental and diet-related illness
(Ruesch).
The “hidden cure” genre of overarching conspiracy theories alleges that the public is denied effective
cures and treatments that the medical-pharmaceutical complex does not consider sufficiently profitable.
A prominent example is the belief that, although the
cure for cancer has been discovered, doctors,
researchers, drug companies, the media, and the
FDA have conspired to suppress the cure in order to
continue generating profits from cancer patients.
There is no plausible evidence for the Rockefeller
and hidden cure theories, which imagine an improbable degree of collusion across a vast array of institutions and professions. But it is not surprising that
such theories are popular, given the very real and
profitable collusion of government, industry, and
research institutions at the expense of consumers.
For example, in a pharmaceuticals market controlled by the FDA, the U.S. pharmaceutical industry enjoys monopoly-like power; and in 2001, U.S.
prescription drug costs—already much higher than
in other countries—spiked 16 percent in a single
year.

Big Medicine and Overarching
Conspiracy Theories
Some conspiracy theories posit seamless collusion
among the intersecting interests involved in medi-

Fact-Based Theories
Many conspiracy theories grow by citing a legitimate
disclosure, linking it to a troubling public health situation, and explaining it all as a large conspiracy—
307

Health Scares

sometimes very plausibly. Patient safety studies
released in the 1990s cited data indicating that 1 in
500 hospital patients is gravely injured or killed by
mistake. Since a professional code of secrecy is traditional in medicine, the safety researchers conducted their own direct studies, finding that the vast
majority of iatrogenic (doctor-caused) disabilities
and deaths are never reported, even within secret
internal hospital reviews. They concluded that the
true percentage of hospital patients killed by a
“medical mistake” is 1 in 50 (Institute of Medicine).
Disclosures of damage caused by prescription
drugs often give rise to theories about prior knowledge and cover-ups, or even about deliberate plots
to induce illness in order to profit by its treatment.
There are parallels in the area of surgery: for example, responses to well-publicized questions about
heart bypass surgery’s efficacy and dangers have
included allegations of unnecessary surgery as well
as an overarching theory that the production and
treatment of heart disease is a large industry in
which agribusiness and fast-food chains profitably
induce the obesity and heart blockage from which
medical and drug interests, cardiac surgeons, hospitals, and device makers profit.
Some conspiracy theories respond to striking
trends in new diagnoses; examples include behavioral disorders such as attention deficit disorder,
mood disorders such as depression and anxiety
states, and so-called hormone deficiencies. Profit is
generally the ascribed motive for the conspiracy to
diagnose and medicate, but some theorists posit
more sinister aims, describing plots to debilitate the
population with mind-numbing drugs such as
Prozac and Ritalin; to pacify women through
“addicting” hormone replacement; to reduce the
population by impairing fertility; and, in a period of
economic instability, to keep the lower classes in
their place by making them fat with fast food.
Fraud and Addiction
Tobacco is a compelling context and paradigm for
the perception of disease-related conspiracies involving profit, public relations, government collusion, and scientific fraud. Broadly publicized exposés have shown not only that industry and
308

government leaders knew tobacco was both addictive and deadly, but that tobacco companies, guided
by their public relations consultants, influenced
research and even directly paid scientists to sign
their names to favorable reports in prestigious medical journals (Rampton and Stauber).
A number of conspiracy theories accuse industry
and marketing interests, in collusion with government, of addicting the population to, in addition to
tobacco: street drugs, alcohol, hormones, Ritalin,
Prozac, fatty food, starchy food, television, the Internet, violent films, sugar, shopping, pornography, and
gambling. Some theories describe significant collusion, for example, that the meat, dairy, and grain
industries work hand in hand with chains like
McDonald’s, whose “supersize” meals help increase
rates of diabetes so that Eli Lilly can reap greater
profits from insulin. The “food disparagement” laws
passed by many states in the 1990s, which attempt to
suppress speculative criticism of food safety, have
helped fuel the perception that agribusiness intimidates the media and buys off politicians.
Transgressive Science
New laboratory techniques and inventions have
given rise to a number of conspiracy-tinged scenarios, including the charge that the human genome
project is being used to develop pathogens that target racially specific populations. There is fearful
speculation about novel pathogens created in the
laboratory, including animal pathogens that cross
over to humans and superpathogens produced
through gene-splicing. Outbreaks of Hanta virus,
Legionnaire’s disease, and some of the rarer hepatitis strains have been followed by speculations that
dangerous new agents bred in the laboratory have
been accidentally or deliberately released.
These fears grow from an anxiety about the
breaching of boundaries between species, between
nature and science, and between genetically distinct
individuals. Some large-scale disease conspiracy theories often harmonize this boundary anxiety with an
anxiety over geographic and demographic boundaries. In an age of globalization, boundaries no
longer separate populations and nations, nor do they
sequester diseases. Popular press books published in

Health Scares

the 1990s describe impending epidemics facilitated
by laboratory experimentation, jet-setting doctors,
negligently unchecked urban overcrowding, mass
migration, and international travel (Garrett).
Immunization
One of the richest popular veins of conspiratorial
theorizing focuses, not surprisingly, on vaccination
programs. Although parents are free to refuse to
immunize their children, state, federal, and school
authorities exert considerable pressure. Immunization programs developed by the government in
league with vaccine manufacturers (who profit
greatly), and aiming to include every child, represent in an immediate form the combined powers of
government, education, and commerce expressed
through medical intervention. The fact that serious
adverse outcomes and even death occur from a
small percentage of vaccinations is widely publicized
and fuels complaints about medicalized coercion
and speculations about more far-reaching damage.
Elaborate theories about intent and damage
related to vaccination are widely discussed, especially on the Internet. New vaccines are constantly
being tested, and covert experimentation is sometimes alleged: for example, there is a theory that a
health maintenance organization (HMO) in California secretly tested a new measles vaccine on 700
minority children (the use of minorities as guinea
pigs resonates with the infamous Tuskeegee medical experiment of the 1930s).
Officially reported “adverse events” tend to be
immediately apparent, but questioners of immunization programs speculate about long-term harm,
including developmental problems, chronic fatigue
syndrome, autoimmune and neurological problems,
and behavioral and learning disorders. Since vaccines are modified pathogens, some antiimmunization protesters use a rhetoric of purity, complaining
that the “pure” bodies of children are invaded, polluted, and disordered by this literalized form of governmental intrusion.
The public revelation that at least one common,
mandated vaccine serum contained a mercury-based
preservative called thimerosol was followed by
charges of outright poisoning and cover-ups. Acting

on the theory that autism is caused by unsafe vaccines in general, and thimerosol in particular, organizations of parents of autistic children were successful in getting the thimerosol-containing vaccine
pulled and the issue brought before a congressional
hearing, where a representative called for criminal
penalties for any government agency that had covered up the thimerosol danger.
Immunization packs together several paranoiainducing aspects of medicine: coercion by power,
population-wide inclusion, the invasion of the body
and the family system, and novel tinkerings that
forever change the body’s functioning. Immunization sometimes serves as the warp into which other
conspiracy theories are woven. For example, a theory about biochip implants for tracking and controlling the populace converges with smallpox vaccination phobia in a theory that smallpox vaccinations
will be used to implant tiny ID microchips useful
for detecting foes during periods of social unrest.
Another theory uses immunization to link chemtrails and West Nile virus. Chemtrails, or contrails,
are the visible condensation streaks left by aircraft
exhaust; conspiracy theorists suspect they are toxic
and represent secret mind-control or weapons testing programs. Citing outbreaks of West Nile virus
and Legionnaire’s disease, and noting that authorities responded to West Nile by spraying New York
with questionable pesticides, one theorist posits
that the outbreaks resulted from pathogens and toxins released as chemtrails in a covert experiment in
mass immunization.
Environmental Dangers
Conspiracy theories constantly emerge in response to
ever-recurring alarms about environmental contamination. The dangers discussed include exposure to
nuclear, microwave, and electromagnetic radiation;
poisoning by toxins, pathogens, and pollutants in the
environment; and contaminants in food and water. A
number of well-publicized incidents since 1970 have
fueled suspicions of widespread industrial fraud and
negligence. These include several nuclear plant neardisasters in the 1970s and the Kerr-McGee plutonium plant mystery, which involved the 1974 death in
a one-car crash of whistle-blower Karen Silkwood
309

Health Scares

(the subject of a 1984 movie). Discoveries of disease
clusters in sites contaminated by industry gave rise, in
the 1990s, to the mass media book and film dramas A
Civil Action and Erin Brockovich, in which poisoned
families with sick or dying children are pitted against
corporate bullies propped up by governmental and
legal authority. Many cancer fears revolve around
suspicions of covered-up exposure and suppressed
knowledge of toxicity.
Some environmental alarmists have set out to
emulate Rachel Carson, whose 1962 exposé of pesticide dangers turned public awareness toward environmental pollution. One self-proclaimed follow-up
is the 1996 book Our Stolen Future, whose authors
look beyond cancer to the reproductive and developmental damages threatening future generations
caused, they write, by hormonally active pollutants,
particularly organochlorines. A red flag, according to
the endocrine disrupter thesis, is the alleged drop in
human sperm levels—a broadly publicized finding
that led to much speculation about the future of
humanity, but which follow-up studies have repeatedly shown to be unsubstantiated. Governmental
responses to the endocrine disrupter scare illustrate
the ineffectual oversight that helps nurture conspiracy-tinged suspicions. Although Congress, spurred
by scientific testimony about emasculated wildlife,
has undertaken a vast Environmental Protection
Agency program to test 80,000 chemicals for estrogenic agency, the United States is one of the few
developed nations in which chlorine pollution by the
paper and chemical industries continues unchecked.
The 1990s saw the publication of plausible, detailed reports and books exposing chemical industry
malfeasance pulled off with the collusion of the government and media. Behind Closed Doors and Toxic
Deception trace machinations to prevent the regulation of dangerous pollutants including dioxin (a
potent organochlorine and a known carcinogen).
PBS aired “Trade Secrets,” exposing how chemical
companies concealed the toxic by-products of vinyl
chloride, particularly dioxin pollution.
Food Scares
The corporate push for genetically modified food
arouses great suspicion. Critics charge that GM
310

food (“Frankenfood”) is profitable to industry not
only because it can be patented, but because crop
uniformity will eventually drive up pesticide
demand. The charge that big food interests take
advantage of poverty to open new markets for GM
food is restated by conspiracy theorists, who
describe a deliberate macroeconomic creation of
food shortages in impoverished nations in order to
open the door to GM food. The food industry’s
opposition to GM food labeling and precautionary
measures fuels such suspicions.
Margit Stange
See also: AIDS; Fluoridation; Gulf War Syndrome.
References
Altieri, Miguel A. 2001. Genetic Engineering in
Agriculture: The Myths, Environmental Risks,
and Alternatives. Oakland, CA: Food First
Special Report No. 1.
Bealle, Morris A. 1949. The Drug Story: A History
of America’s $10,000,000,000 Drug Cartel. Orem,
UT: Bi World Industries, Inc.
Berkson, D. Lindsay. 2000. Hormone Deception.
Chicago, IL: Contemporary Books.
Center for Health, Environment and Justice. 2001.
“Behind Closed Doors.”
Colborne, Theo, et al. 1996. Our Stolen Future.
New York: Penguin.
Ehrenreich, Barbara, and Deirdre English. 1978.
For Her Own Good: 150 Years of the
Experts’Advice to Women. New York:
Anchor/Doubleday.
Fagin, Dan, and Marianne Lavelle. 1996. Toxic
Deception: How the Chemical Industry
Manipulates Science, Bends the Law, and
Endangers Your Health. New York: Common
Courage Press.
Garrett, Laurie. 1994. The Coming Plague: Newly
Emerging Diseases in a World out of Balance.
New York: Farrar Strauss and Giroux.
Institute of Medicine. 2000. To Err Is Human:
Building a Safer Health System. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press.
Kett, Joseph. 1968. The Formation of the American
Medical Profession: The Role of Institutions,
1780–1860. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Knight, Peter. 2000. Conspiracy Culture: From
Kennedy to The X-Files. London and New York:
Routledge.
Levit, Katharine, et al. 2003. “Trends in U.S. Health
Care Spending, 2001.” Health Affairs, the Policy
Journal of the Health Sphere 22 (1).

Hearst, William Randolph

Rampton, Sheldon, and John Stauber. 2001. Trust
Us, We’re Experts!—How Industry Manipulates
Science and Gambles with Your Future. New
York: Tarcher/Putnam.
Ruesch, Hans. 1992. Naked Empress or the Great
Medical Fraud. Zurich: CIVIS.
Vann, Riley. “The Diseased City: Yellow Fever and
Cultural Paranoia in 1790s Philadelphia.” http://
xroads.virginia.edu/~MA96/forrest/WW/fever.
html.
Websites
Food First (Institute of Food and Development
Policy): http://www.foodfirst.org.
Greenpeace: http://www.greenpeaceusa.org.
National Vaccine Program Office: http://www.cdc.
gov/od/nvpo.
“Not Milk” home page: http://www.notmilk.com
PBS: http://www.pbs.org/tradesecrets.
Shirley’s Wellness Café: http://www.
shirleys-wellness-cafe.com/index.htm.
Think Twice Global Vaccine Institute: http://www.
thinktwice.com.

Hearst, William Randolph
The unprecedented power of William Randolph
Hearst (1863–1951) opened the media magnate to
charges of conspiratorial behavior throughout his
entire career. With his hands firmly wrapped around
the levers of public opinion, Hearst happily applied
pressure to his enemies (such as Theodore Roosevelt
and Orson Welles) and an almost suffocating
embrace to his own enthusiasms (the eight-hour
workday, the annexation of Mexico, or Marion
Davies’s acting career, for example). Many aspects of
Hearst’s professional career have been viewed
through a conspiracy-tinged lens, although perhaps
the most often invoked is his alleged “engineering”
of the Spanish-American War. There were other
public moments when charges of Hearst-generated
conspiracies were alleged. Among the most interesting are those associated with the McKinley assassination, the death of Hollywood producer Thomas Ince,
and the campaign to expunge Welles’s classic film
Citizen Kane.
In the history of modern media, perhaps no individual was more skillful in marshaling the tools of
communication to promote his own agenda than
William Randolph Hearst. His early twentieth-

century media empire—which he built through the
inherited wealth of his father’s mining enterprises—was influential in a way not easily appreciated today. At the peak of his power he owned
twenty-eight newspapers, with most of them in the
largest U.S. cities, as well as eighteen widely circulated magazines, influential film studios, several
radio stations, and for a time a political constituency
of national consequence.
Hearst was more than a media figure. He was outsized in his influence, and his ego. His grasp of the
media matrix in its infancy was as thorough as his
commitment to push his agenda on the U.S. public,
and his use of the tools of technology to advance his
own causes—from the global (Spanish-American
War) to the ephemeral (the film career of chorusgirl-turned-actress Marion Davies)—earned him
the requisite fear, awe, and contempt of his media
brethren. Financially wounded by the Great
Depression and undermined by the backlash against
his pro-German sympathies in the 1930s, his massive empire and influence declined throughout the
last decade of his life. Although he died 14 August
1951, the Hearst Corporation remains a formidable
publishing conglomerate, employing nearly 20,000
people and producing dozens of magazines and
newspapers, as well as maintaining an active presence in business publishing, cable television, radio,
even real estate.
The McKinley Assassination
Establishing a pattern that would become familiar to
readers of his newspapers for half a century, Hearst
mercilessly attacked the sitting president during his
reelection campaign in 1900. Hearst’s papers
assailed President William McKinley in their news
stories and front-page editorials, and savagely delineated him and his Republican cronies in cartoons.
Hearst attacked McKinley for his support of wealthy
industrialists, his pro-trust business policies, and his
anti-working-class hubris. When a crazed assassin
named Leon Czolgosz murdered McKinley at the
Buffalo World’s Fair in September 1901, some
Republican politicians and many Republican newspapers accused Hearst of inflaming the murderous
hatred of Czolgosz through editorials such as the
311

Hearst, William Randolph

William Randolph Hearst, 1863–1951. (Library of
Congress)

one published in Hearst’s papers the previous April:
“If bad institutions and bad men can be got rid of
only by killing, then killing must be done.” Competing newspapers and a handful of powerful politicians
were quick to denounce this Hearst-generated pattern of stirring up the masses through his papers’
consistent, coordinated attacks on McKinley.
According to biographer David Nasaw, no less a figure than Vice-President Theodore Roosevelt fingered Hearst as bearing some responsibility for the
assassin’s act: “Every scoundrel like Hearst and his
satellites who for whatever purposes appeals to and
inflames evil human passion has made himself accessory before the fact to every crime of this nature.”
Death on the Water
Another death—and a more enduring suspicion
about Hearst’s direct involvement—enmeshed the
publisher in November 1924. Movie producer
Thomas Ince, who was celebrating his forty-third
312

birthday at a star-studded private party aboard
Hearst’s yacht, the Oneida, died shortly after being
taken off the boat early the following morning.
Although Hearst claimed that Ince had suffered a
heart attack on board, there was rampant speculation in the gossip columns and throughout Hollywood that Hearst had murdered Ince. Murmured
motives included everything from an untenable
clash of egos to, more salaciously, a theory that
Hearst shot Ince while he was firing at Charlie
Chaplin, who was allegedly having an affair with
Hearst’s mistress Marion Davies. The “Hearst-shotInce-while-gunning-for-Chaplin” theory was the
premise of a 2001 film, The Cat’s Meow, directed by
Peter Bogdonovich and adapted from Steven
Peros’s play about the incident.
No evidence has ever been produced linking
Hearst to the crime, although his yacht full of
media-connected guests (a regular group of revelers who usually partied at Davies’s Los Angeles
mansion, according to Chaplin) remained uncharacteristically silent about the incident. The conspiracy theorists claim Hearst swore them all to silence
and that none of the witnesses would have risked
incurring the wrath of the media giant by revealing
the truth.
Razing Kane
Hearst’s attempt to squelch distribution of Orson
Welles’s 1941 masterpiece, Citizen Kane, led to
what several biographers have called a “clash of
titans.” Hearst—informed by columnist Hedda
Hopper after she screened the movie that the portrayal of Kane/Hearst was a “vicious and irresponsible attack”—pulled out all the stops to keep the
movie from being shown (Carringer). In one of the
earliest examples of the power of vertical media
integration, Hearst allegedly threatened Kane’s producers, RKO, with an advertising blackout of all
future RKO movies in Hearst magazines, newspapers, and newsreels. Hearst supposedly promised
unflattering, magazine-length profiles of RKO
executives in his publications and reportedly even
threatened to initiate FBI investigation of members
of the RKO board of directors and of executives
associated with the film. Hearst’s newspapers

Hiss, Alger

labeled Welles a Communist sympathizer and
attacked his association with a group of radio writers and directors called “The Free Company,”
whom Hearst labeled as anti-American leftists.
The film did eventually open, though in limited
release around the country. Despite its widespread
celebration by reviewers (Time magazine called it
“Hollywood’s greatest creation”), the film—battered by Hearst’s preemptive publicity strikes—was
a commercial failure. Only after RKO sold its film
library to television in 1956 did the movie find its
audience. In 1962, the film magazine Sight and
Sound voted it the greatest film ever made.
Hearst didn’t kill Citizen Kane, but he wounded
it, and it wouldn’t be until well after “the Chief” (as
his employees called him) was dead that his quasibiographical counterpart Charles Foster Kane
became, for a new generation of media consumers,
the enduring icon of a once-mighty publishing
empire.
James Broderick
See also: Yellow Journalism.
References
Carringer, Robert L. 1996. The Making of Citizen
Kane. Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.
Chaplin, Charles. 1964. My Autobiography. New
York: Simon and Schuster.
Nasaw, David. 2000. The Chief: The Life of William
Randolph Hearst. New York: Houghton Mifflin.

Hiss, Alger
In the anticommunist trials at the beginning of the
cold war, Alger Hiss was accused of having infiltrated the government in the 1930s, and debate
continues to this day about whether he was indeed
part of a larger Communist conspiracy or whether
there was a conspiracy to frame him.
On 3 August 1948, Whittaker Chambers, a senior
editor at Time magazine, testified before the House
Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) about
his firsthand knowledge of Communist cells that he
said had infiltrated the federal government in
Washington, D.C. Chambers described the cells as
Marxist study groups that were not involved in

espionage and he testified that he ceased to have
contact with them after he left the Communist
Party in 1937.
Chambers had already told his story to a number
of government officials, going back to 1939, but
only now in a year when the Republican Party had
its first real chance to capture the White House
since 1933 was it getting a public airing. Republicans on the committee were eager to use their hearings to paint the Democrats, specifically the current
administration of President Harry S. Truman and
the former administration of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, as “soft” on communism and heavily influenced by Moscow.
One of those Chambers named as a Communist
was Alger Hiss, a former State Department official,
who was then the president of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Before he left the government in 1946, Hiss had served on President Roosevelt’s staff at the Yalta Conference in February
1945. Later that year, he served as secretary-general
of the San Francisco Conference, where the United
Nations was organized. He had joined the Carnegie
Endowment to help further U.S. work at the UN,
which had come under harsh attack by powerful
right-wing groups across the country.
Two days after Chambers’s testimony, Hiss
appeared before the HUAC. He denied any association with Communists and said that he had never
met Chambers. He was such an impressive witness
that several committee members wanted to drop
the matter, but one member, first-term Congressman Richard M. Nixon, had been fed a number of
secret reports charging that Hiss had been a Communist (all of which could be traced to a single
source—Chambers), and he convinced the committee to continue the investigation.
On 7 August, Chambers met in secret session
with the committee and testified to a great deal of
information about Hiss’s private life. Much of this
information was wrong—Chambers clearly was
exaggerating his relationship with Hiss—yet it was
also apparent from his testimony that he had known
Hiss back in the 1930s, though not as Whittaker
Chambers. During his 7 August testimony, Chambers revealed that Hiss only knew him as “Carl.”
313

Hiss, Alger

Alger and Priscilla Hiss leave a New York federal court arm in arm. (Library of Congress)

Once Hiss realized who Chambers was, he testified on 16 August that he knew Chambers as a freelance writer named “George Crosley” who had
come to him to get some information for a story. He
said he had gotten to know Crosley for a while, but
when Crosley failed to pay back several small loans,
Hiss cut off their relationship. In subsequent hearings, Chambers denied ever using the name Crosley,
but months later, after Hiss located a publisher who
also knew Chambers as Crosley, Chambers conceded that he probably had used the pseudonym.
Furious at what he saw as malicious slander, Hiss
sued Chambers for libel. Chambers responded by
314

escalating the charges. During pretrial depositions
in Baltimore, Maryland, that November, Chambers
offered into evidence four slips of paper in Hiss’s
handwriting as well and a sheaf of typewritten
pages (later called the Baltimore Documents) that
he said were copies of State Department documents that had been typed by the Hisses at their
home and then handed to Chambers for transmission to the Soviet Union. Two weeks later, Chambers dropped a public bombshell when he led
HUAC investigators to his Maryland farm, and
from a hollowed-out pumpkin pulled five rolls of
35mm film, which he said contained photographs

Hiss, Alger

of documents implicating Hiss and others in an espionage conspiracy.
These new charges were at odds with Chambers’s
previous testimony, not only before the HUAC, but
also before a grand jury, that he was not involved
with espionage. Because the documents were dated
into April 1938, they presented another problem:
Chambers had insisted in nearly all his statements as
far back as 1939 that he had left the party in 1938.
The public uproar over these so-called Pumpkin
Papers increased pressure to indict Hiss, but that,
too, presented roadblocks. Hiss could not be
indicted on espionage charges because the statute
of limitations protected him from being charged
with a crime that had allegedly taken place more
than ten years before. The solution was to ask Hiss
before the grand jury whether he committed espionage. He denied it, and on 15 December 1948 he
was charged with perjury.
But Chambers still presented a problem. He had
admitted perjuring himself before the grand jury
when he denied any firsthand knowledge of espionage. If he were to be indicted as well, a jury at
Hiss’s trial might not believe the testimony of an
admitted liar. At the urging of Richard Nixon, who
testified before the grand jury on 14 December, the
jury decided against indicting Chambers. As for his
previous testimony that he had left the party in
1937, Chambers simply amended his testimony, saying he was merely preparing to leave in 1937 and
didn’t make his break after April 1938.
Hiss’s trial opened in May 1949 and ended in July
with a hung jury, voting 8–4 for conviction. Hiss was
retried that November and this time was convicted.
He went to jail in March 1951 and served forty-four
months in a maximum security penitentiary before
his release in November 1954.
At his sentencing on 25 January 1951, Hiss told
the judge, “I am confident that in the future the full
facts of how Whittaker Chambers was able to carry
out forgery by typewriter will be disclosed.” The
campaign to prove that he had been framed began
at that moment and Hiss directed his attorneys to
search for any evidence that would prove his innocence. After his appeals had been exhausted, he
hired a new lawyer who filed a motion for a new trial

in 1952. In the motion, Hiss for the first time presented evidence that his conviction was obtained
from fraudulent evidence. The questions it raised
included the following:
• Was the Woodstock typewriter #230099 that
was presented in evidence at the trial by the
defense (claiming the Hisses gave it away
long before the documents were allegedly
typed) a clever fake planted on the defense
by the FBI?
• Was forgery by typewriter possible and specifically, were the copies of State Department
documents placed in evidence by the prosecution forged by Whittaker Chambers or a
confederate?
• Did Whittaker Chambers leave the Communist Party long before the April 1938 dates of
the last document and therefore could not
have received those documents from Hiss?
The defense offered a great deal of evidence to
support its brief. It stated that according to Woodstock company records, a typewriter with serial
number #230099 would have been manufactured
too late to have been the machine given to Hiss’s
wife by her father when his company went out of
business in 1932. Another expert examined the type
bars on the machine and found that they had been
altered. The assumption was they had been altered
so that typing from the machine would match the
typing on the Baltimore documents.
Experts also looked at the documents themselves
and concluded that contrary to Chambers’s testimony that Hiss’s wife Priscilla had typed them, they
had been typed by several people. Another expert
made a careful examination of the paper and the
envelope that Chambers said they had been stored
in for ten years and concluded that their condition
precluded Chambers’s story from being true.
Chambers had testified that he ceased getting
documents from Hiss after he left the Communist
Party. He also said he had gotten work as a translator after he left the party. The brief used letters
from the publishing company to show that Chambers had been assigned the translation in 1937.
315

Hiss, Alger

In its response, the government ridiculed Hiss’s
brief, saying forgery by typewriter was an impossibility. It also contradicted the defense’s typing
experts, saying the information was irrelevant anyway to the charges against Hiss. As for the date
when Chambers left the party, it said he was only
preparing for a break when he got the translation
work. The judge agreed with the prosecution, and
Hiss’s motion was turned down.
Many years later, it was revealed that not only was
forgery by typewriter possible, but that it had
already been employed by the government. In 1940,
the FBI had worked with Canadian agents to forge
a typewritten letter to convince the president of
Brazil that an Italian airline had connections with
Nazi Germany. The ruse worked, and the president
cut off the airline’s landing rights in Brazil. Hiss
appealed the motion’s denial, but his efforts were
unsuccessful, and the case appeared to be dead until
the mid-1970s when Hiss, working with new attorneys, successfully sued the government under the
Freedom of Information Act and received some
45,000 investigative documents on the case from the
FBI.
The documents confirmed some of the suspicions aired in Hiss’s 1952 motion and, worse, indicated that the government knew about or helped
hide information that would have benefited Hiss at
trial.
Among other things, the documents showed that:
• The FBI knew that a typewriter with the
serial number #230099 was manufactured too
late to have been the Hiss machine.
• Previous statements by Chambers that had
been inconsistent with his testimony at both
trials were concealed from the defense by the
government. Among the statements was one
revealing his homosexuality, which could have
provided a motive for his charges.
• The FBI had gotten statements from other
witnesses indicating that key portions of
Chambers’s testimony were false.
• An investigator working for the defense
turned out to be a mole for the FBI, who

316

turned over a great deal of what he found for
the defense to the prosecution.
Armed with this evidence, Hiss’s new attorneys
went to court in 1978 filing a motion of coram nobis
to overturn the verdict based on what they said was
prosecutorial misconduct. Again, the government
opposed the motion for, saying the information,
even if true, would not have been enough to overturn the original verdict. The judge sided with the
government and subsequent appeals again were
unsuccessful. Legally, the Hiss case was dead.
But not quite. In 1992, Hiss wrote a letter to one
of Russia’s preeminent historians, General Dimitry
Volkogonov, requesting that he examine the files of
the KGB for any evidence of Hiss’s guilt. Volkogonov did examine the files and announced that
while Hiss clearly had contacts with the Soviets during the course of his official duties, they contained
no evidence that Hiss had ever been a Soviet spy.
His statement was greeted harshly by U.S. conservatives. In response, Volkogonov admitted that he
hadn’t looked through all the files, but he still said
that if Hiss had been a spy, he would have seen
some indication of it in the files he had examined,
and he had seen none.
Then, in 1995, the National Security Agency
(NSA) released several hundred telegrams between
Moscow and its U.S. agents that it had decrypted
during the cold war. Two of the telegrams discuss an
agent code-named “Ales.” According to the NSA,
Ales was Hiss. Others disagreed, pointing out that
the NSA was merely guessing and that there was no
such proof that Ales was Hiss. This view received
some support with the 1996 publication of a book in
Russia called Operation Snow, by a former KGB
official named Vitaly Pavlov. In the book, Pavlov,
who joined the KGB in 1939, insisted that Hiss was
never a Soviet spy.
By then, the information was too late for Hiss,
who died four days after his ninety-second birthday
on 15 November 1996, still proclaiming his innocence. As for Chambers, he died long before, under
mysterious circumstances on 1 June 1961. Like
Hiss, he went to his grave insisting that his testi-

Hoffa, Jimmy

mony was truthful. With more than a dozen books
written on the case representing both sides, what
actually happened between the two men back in
the 1930s remains a topic of deep disagreement.
Jeff Kisseloff
See also: Anticommunism; Atomic Secrets;
Chambers, Whittaker; House Un-American
Activities Committee; Venona Project.
References
Caute, David. 1978. The Great Fear: The AntiCommunist Purge under Truman and
Eisenhower. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Chambers, Whittaker. 1952. Witness. New York:
Random House.
Cooke, Alastair. 1950. A Generation on Trial. New
York: Knopf.
Hiss, Alger. 1957. In the Court of Public Opinion.
New York: Knopf.
In Re Alger Hiss. 1980. 2 vols. New York: Hill and
Wang.
Weinstein, Allen. 1978. Perjury: The Hiss–Chambers
Case. New York: Knopf.

Hoffa, Jimmy
His long disappearance has supplied endless jokes
for late-night comedians and the theories about
what happened to him have spawned a half-dozen
nonfiction books; three fictionalized accounts,
including a comic treatment; a Hollywood movie
written by David Mamet and starring Danny
DeVito and Jack Nicholson; and a few prime-time
television specials.
Where is Jimmy Hoffa? How could such a wellknown figure—revered by his loyal union members
and reviled by former Attorney General Robert
Kennedy and other U.S. government officials—just
disappear? Is the ex-Teamster leader buried under
the end zone of Giants Stadium in the New Jersey
Meadowlands as is rumored ?
Some facts are indisputable: Jimmy Hoffa was
last seen in the parking lot of the Machus Red Fox
restaurant in Bloomfield Hills, a Detroit suburb, at
about 2:30 P.M. on 30 July 1975. He was supposed
to meet two Mafia leaders, Anthony Giacalone of
Detroit and Anthony Provenzano of Union City,

New Jersey. Neither of these men ever showed up.
Jimmy Hoffa was declared legally dead on 30 July
1982.
So what happened? The speculation began
immediately. Newsweek mentioned the following
possible murder motivations: Hoffa was challenging
the leadership of then Teamster head Frank
Fitzsimmons. During the previous months, severe
conflicts within the union resulted in frequent violence. Fitzsimmons, however, pledged his full cooperation in the investigation and Local 299 offered a
$25,000 reward for information about Hoffa’s
whereabouts. Rumors also persisted about a mob
connection: Anthony (“Tony Pro”) Provenzano was
considered a possible suspect because Hoffa was
allegedly threatening to expose Mafia links to the
Teamsters. In July 1982, a federal witness testified
at a U.S. Senate hearing that Hoffa was “ground up
in pieces, shipped to Florida and dumped in a
swamp” (Newsweek).
According to excerpts from FBI case files, published in a two-part series in the Detroit Sunday
Journal in October 1975, “All sources believe that
Hoffa’s disappearance is directly connected to his
attempts to regain power within the Teamsters
Union, which would possibly have an effect on the
LCN’s [La Costra Nostra] control and manipulation
of Teamster Pension Funds” (Zacharis). After his
disappearance, the FBI investigated a claim made
by one Teamster that Hoffa, disguised in fake
glasses, checked into a hotel on 2 August 1975,
under the name of “Jewell.”
Other theories: Donald Frankos, a prison inmate,
told Playboy that he was involved in a plot to kill
Hoffa and that the remains were mixed with concrete used to build Giants Stadium. “He ain’t here,”
later declared John Samerjan, vice-president of
public affairs for the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority.
When convicted murderer Ricky Powell claimed
that Hoffa was floating beneath two dams in Michigan, Boating magazine posted a $10,000 reward to
the person who could find his remains in the Au
Sable River, 175 miles from Detroit. Nobody ever
claimed the award. Los Angeles Magazine speculated

317

Hollywood Ten

ter of a century later, the mystery still remains unsolved.
Hoffa also bears a perhaps unique distinction: he
is a victim of a possible conspiracy and he may be a
party in one of the major conspiracy theories of the
twentieth century. In 1979, four years after Hoffa’s
disappearance, the House Select Commission on
Assassinations (HSCA) stated that Jimmy Hoffa,
along with two mob figures—Carlos Marcello and
Santos Trafficante—had the “motives, means and
opportunity” to kill Robert Kennedy. The former
attorney general was a longtime Hoffa nemesis
because of his vigorous prosecution of the Teamster
leadership. A federal informant reportedly said that
Hoffa would like to kill Kennedy but that his
brother was a more likely target because “when you
cut down the tree, the branches fall with it”
(Caloff). The HSCA was never able to establish any
evidence of mob complicity in either of the assassinations.
Donald Altschiller

Jimmy Hoffa. (Library of Congress)

that Hoffa’s remains were located at the El Dorado
Restaurant and Poker Club in Gardena, California,
but Larry Flynt, the pornography publisher, later
purchased the property and no evidence was ever
found.
Investigative reporter Dan Moldea, who spent
more than two decades writing about Hoffa, believes
that Salvatore (“Sally Bugs”) Briguglio, a Local 560
business agent, killed the Teamster leader.
In September 2001, DNA tests indicated that a
hair taken from Mr. Hoffa’s hairbrush was found in
the car driven by Charles “Chuckie” O’Brien—a
union member with ties to the Mafia—on the day
Hoffa disappeared. Federal prosecutors had to
decide no later than December 2003 whether to
press charges. In the 1980s, author Steven Brill
called the Hoffa disappearance the “most notorious
unsolved mystery of the decade.” More than a quar318

See also: Kennedy, John F., Assassination of;
Kennedy, Robert F., Assassination of.
References
Alpern, David M. 1975. “Jimmy Hoffa Vanishes.”
Newsweek, August 11.
Caloff, Pamela 1998. “The Conspiracy Theories.”
Texas Monthly 26: 128–134.
Cogan, David M. 1999. “Jimmy Hoffa Found!” Los
Angeles Magazine 44: 3, 32.
Moldea, Dan E. 1978. The Hoffa Wars: Teamsters,
Rebels, Politicians, and the Mob. New York:
Paddington Press.
Newsweek. 1982. “Jimmy Hoffa Is Legally Dead.”
August 9.
Zacharis, Pat. 1975. “The Day Jimmy Hoffa Didn’t
Come Home.” The Detroit News. http://detnews.
com/history/hoffa/hoffa.htm.

Hollywood Ten
Among the first and most visible victims of the
post–World War II wave of anticommunist paranoia,
the Hollywood Ten were a group of leftist filmmakers—producer Adrian Scott, directors Edward
Dmytryk and Herbert Biberman, and screenwriters
Alvah Bessie, Lester Cole, Ring Lardner, Jr., John

Hollywood Ten

Howard Lawson, Albert Maltz, Samuel Ornitz, and
Dalton Trumbo—who were blacklisted by the film
industry and ultimately sentenced to a year in federal prison for contempt of Congress after refusing
to cooperate with the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) in 1947.
For Hollywood conservatives, the postwar surge
of social problem films, the presence of known Communists in the leadership of the Screen Writers
Guild, and a series of violent strikes in 1945 and
1946 by the leftist Conference of Studio Unions,
were all evidence of a vast Communist conspiracy to
control the film industry and undermine U.S. democratic values. Their greatest outrage was directed at
the pro-Soviet films produced during the war—Song
of Russia, Mission to Moscow, The North Star—but
they also detected Marxist propaganda in a wide
variety of progressive films including Crossfire, The
Farmer’s Daughter, and The Best Years of Our Lives.
In 1944, Hollywood reactionaries had formed the
Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of
American Ideals (MPA); early in 1947, the MPA
issued an open invitation to the HUAC to investigate
Communist influence in the film industry.
The HUAC eagerly accepted. Hollywood, with
its twin threats of Jewish domination and Communist infiltration, had long been an irresistible target
for conspiracy theorists, and the film industry had
weathered innumerable attacks by both federal and
state investigating committees since the 1930s. In
the postwar period, however, the political landscape
had considerably altered as the emerging cold war
abroad profoundly raised the stakes in the anticommunist crusade at home. In the spring and summer
of 1947, FBI agents swarmed over the film colony
while HUAC chairman J. Parnell Thomas himself
held a series of closed-door interviews at the Biltmore Hotel with “friendly” witnesses. In September, the HUAC issued subpoenas to forty-three
members of the film community, including nineteen who would become known as the “unfriendlies” for their vocal opposition to the HUAC.
The “unfriendlies” were a diverse group in terms
of age, ethnicity, class background, status, and experience within the film industry, and even political
commitment. Although all were linked with the

Communist Party at some point in their lives, their
individual commitments to the party line or to political activism diverged wildly. Nonetheless, there was
common ground: all were fierce (even “premature”)
antifascists, and all were committed to integrating
their politics into their creative work. Rejecting the
studio moguls’ contention that movies were simply
entertainment, they believed that movies could and
should reflect the diversity of the body politic and
represent U.S. values of democracy, social justice,
and tolerance. Rallying around the slogan “freedom
of the screen,” the Hollywood radicals and their supporters (which initially included an impressive coalition of leading liberals and the studio heads) clearly
understood that the HUAC’s investigation was
intended not simply to smear individual film radicals
but to discredit the very values that underlay their
cultural politics. For them, the HUAC investigation
was the opening salvo in a reactionary conspiracy to
destroy civil liberties, indeed, a harbinger of fascism
in the United States.
To a certain extent, both sides were right. Hollywood radicals did try, within the confines of a profoundly conservative studio system, to produce antifascist, antiracist, internationalist, progressive films.
And the HUAC members, recognizing the power of
film to shape public consciousness and to reflect the
nation to the world, did want to ensure that Hollywood films reflected their own conservative version
of Americanism.
At the hearings in Washington in late October,
only eleven of the nineteen unfriendlies were called
to testify. One, Bertolt Brecht, fled for Europe as
soon as the hearings had ended. The remaining ten
were charged with contempt of Congress and fired
from their positions at the studios. Blacklisted, they
left Hollywood for New York, Europe, and even
Mexico in search of work, while their lawyers unsuccessfully appealed the contempt convictions.
The Hollywood Ten entered federal prison in 1950;
when released the following year, the HUAC had
returned to Hollywood with a vengeance, and hundreds of radicals joined the Ten on the blacklist
while dozens more named names to save themselves and their careers. One of those was director
Edward Dmytryk, the only member of the Ten to
319

Hollywood screenwriter Ring Lardner, Jr., being led away in handcuffs to serve a one-year jail sentence for refusing to
answer questions before the House Un-American Activities Committee. Lester Cole and Herbert Biberman in
background. (Library of Congress)

320

Holocaust, Denial of

recant and return to work at the studios. The
remainder of the Ten continued to work haphazardly, writing behind fronts for both film and television. In the late 1950s, the first chinks appeared in
the blacklist when Dalton Trumbo, writing under
the pseudonym “Robert Rich,” won the screenwriting Oscar for The Brave One; in 1960, the blacklist
was officially broken when Otto Preminger hired
Trumbo to adapt Exodus. Ultimately, however, the
blacklist affected not only people but ideas. The climate of fear created by the anticommunist crusade
stifled dissent and encouraged political and cultural
conformity in ways that powerfully shaped the film
industry and the larger culture of postwar America.
Jennifer Langdon-Teclaw
See also: Anticommunism; House Un-American
Activities Committee.
References
Ceplair, Larry, and Steven Englund. 1979. The
Inquisition in Hollywood: Politics in the Film
Community, 1930–1960. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.
Dick, Bernard. 1989. Radical Innocence: A Critical
Study of the Hollywood Ten. Lexington:
University of Kentucky Press.

Holocaust, Denial of
The Nazi Holocaust is one of the events of history
that has received the greatest scrutiny. While historians disagree on different aspects of this phenomenon, it is basically agreed on that the Holocaust may
be correctly defined as follows: (1) the Holocaust
was the intentional murder of European Jews by the
Nazi government of Germany during World War II
as a matter of state policy; (2) this mass murder
employed gas chambers, among other methods, as a
method of killing; and (3) the death toll of European
Jews by the end of World War II was roughly 6 million. Not surprisingly, with a group of historical
events as laboriously studied as the Holocaust, conspiracy theories about this period abound. However,
the most prominent U.S. conspiracy theory regarding the Holocaust is its denial.
Before discussing how Holocaust denial constitutes a conspiracy theory, and how the theory is dis-

tinctly American, it is important to understand what
is meant by the term “Holocaust denial.” Holocaust
deniers, or “revisionists,” as they call themselves,
question all three major points of definition of the
Nazi Holocaust. First, they contend that, while
mass murders of Jews did occur (although they dispute both the intentionality of such murders as well
as the supposed deservedness of these killings),
there was no official Nazi policy to murder Jews.
Second, and perhaps most prominently, they contend that there were no homicidal gas chambers,
particularly at Auschwitz-Birkenau, where mainstream historians believe over 1 million Jews were
murdered, primarily in gas chambers. And third,
Holocaust deniers contend that the death toll of
European Jews during World War II was well below
6 million. Deniers float numbers anywhere
between 300,000 and 1.5 million, as a general rule.
While Holocaust denial began as a German and
French conspiracy theory, its antecedents are both
specifically American and an encapsulation of 2,000
years of European antisemitism. Addressing the latter point first, the conspiracy theory that Jews have
manipulated non-Jews in many ways, shapes, and
forms is nearly as old as Judaism itself. According to
antisemites, Jews (not just the ruling Jewish elite of
the first century, but all Jews) killed Jesus, poisoned
wells, spread the Black Death, murdered Christian
children to make Passover matzohs with their blood,
and were the prime movers behind the Communist
movement in Eastern Europe. If a single text encapsulates European antisemitism, it is the anonymous
Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion, the purported minutes of a meeting of leaders of international Jewry in which the destruction of non-Jewish
culture is discussed. Originating in Russia at the beginning of the twentieth century, the Protocols were,
in fact, an altered plagiarism of Maurice Joly’s Dialogue aux Enfers entre Montesquieu et Machiavel (A
Dialogue in Hell between Montesquieu and Machiavelli), written in the 1860s as an attack against
Louis Napoleon III (Ridgeway, 50).
Oddly, despite the present connections between
some Holocaust deniers and violent extremists, it
was via the anti-war movement of World War I that
the seeds of Holocaust denial were planted in the
321

Holocaust, Denial of

United States. This process was twofold. First, the
antisemitic U.S. industrialist Henry Ford brought
the Protocols to the United States after a visit to
Europe during World War I designed to promote a
peaceful resolution to the conflict. Ford read them
and became convinced that the “Jewish industrialists” were primarily responsible for the war. The
introduction of this document to a nation where Ku
Klux Klan membership was on the rise added antisemitism to the current nativist, racist, anti-Catholic
sentiment. Ford published the Protocols in his newspaper, the Dearborn Independent, over a seven-year
period between the two world wars, giving legitimacy to a conspiracy of a Jewish cabal that sought to
propagate war as a moneymaking operation.
At the same time, antiwar historians, notably
Harry Elmer Barnes, began to suggest conspiratorial motivations on the part of the major powers at
war. As historian Deborah Lipstadt has noted,
Barnes and his colleagues were correct in many of
their assumptions, for example, Germany was not
solely at fault for the war (Serbia had, after all, fired
the opening salvo); much anti-German propaganda
spread during and after the war was, in fact, false;
and there were war profiteers who made fortunes on
the slaughter of the war (Lipstadt, 33–34). However,
this did not change the essentially imperial nature of
the war itself. Nevertheless, with the doubts of
Barnes and his cohorts borne out through historical
method, reports of German atrocities committed
during World War II (this time true) would be
treated with even greater skepticism. Barnes, who
lived into the late 1960s, was among the first Americans to embrace Holocaust denial.
Aside from the obvious denial of Nazi atrocities
by the perpetrators themselves, the Frenchman
Paul Rassinier, a leftist who had been interned at
Buchenwald and Dora, first promoted Holocaust
denial most vociferously. (Rassinier’s influence on
the culture of Holocaust denial is still felt today, with
his disciple Robert Faurisson leading the denial
movement in France.) It did not take denial long to
reach the United States, however. The first major
Holocaust denier was Austin App, a Pennsylvaniabased literary scholar. Beginning almost immediately after the war, App began a media campaign to
322

expose what he believed were exaggerations in the
Nazi treatment of Jews. While his own German ethnicity was likely a prime attraction for him to denial,
App’s own antisemitism and susceptibility to conspiracy theories informed much of his writing. For
instance, App frequently used any combination of
the terms “Talmudist,” “Bolshevik,” and “Zionist” in
his writings as indicators that Jews were behind what
he deemed a hoax that the Nazis had murdered 6
million Jews. In this way, he was able to imply that
religious Jews, atheistic Communist Jews, and
nationalist Jews were all conspiring together to
spread belief in a mass murder against Jews. Furthermore, App blamed Jewish media control for the
continued belief in this hoax (Lipstadt, 94–96), and
this continues to be a theme in antisemitic and
denial writings. If, as John Zimmerman and other
observers have noted, the aim of Holocaust denial is
to rehabilitate National Socialism, then it is fitting
that App et al. would reiterate most of Hitler’s own
antisemitic themes in their writings (Zimmerman,
119).
The title of App’s major work on the Holocaust,
The Six Million Swindle, is informative because it
implies on its very own the existence of a conspiracy
of Jews to perpetrate a hoax against non-Jews for
monetary gain. This monetary gain, specificically,
would be reparations paid by West Germany for
crimes committed against Jews during the war. What
App and later deniers fail to address is a simple fact:
reparations have been paid out since the 1950s
based not on the number of deaths of Jews during
World War II, but rather on the number of Jews who
survived and whose costs of being settled elsewhere
(primarily Israel) needed to be paid. Historian
Michael Shermer has pointed out that, were the
Holocaust truly a hoax designed by Zionists to gain
cash for the fledgling state of Israel, then Zionists
would have inflated the number of survivors and not
the number of dead (Shermer and Grobman, 106).
Nevertheless, the Zionist angle of the conspiracy
continued to be played by deniers and continues to
this day. After App, U.S. Holocaust denial was carried on by Arthur Butz, a professor of electrical engineering at Northwestern University outside Chicago.
In his 1976 book The Hoax of the Twentieth Century,

Holocaust, Denial of

Butz reiterates the notion that the Holocaust is a
consciously perpetrated falsification of history. While
Butz is more subtle than App in blaming Jews for this
hoax (he does not attack the Jewish religion in the
manner of App, nor does he depict all Jews as Communists), he does target Zionists specifically as the
hoaxsters, along with the governments of the Allies
(particularly the Soviet Union), refugee and survivor
organizations, and even the International Committee
of the Red Cross (Lipstadt, 126).
What Butz and other deniers fail to realize is the
relative weakness of the Zionist movement before,
during, and even after World War II. Zionism was
considered heretical by most Jewish religious movements, and those Jews that did settle in Palestine
before the founding of the State of Israel in 1948
were largely refugees with nowhere else to go,
rather than political ideologues bent on creating a
Jewish state in Palestine. Indeed, much recent research from Israel on the Holocaust has shown that
some major figures in the Zionist movement cared
very little about the dire situation of Jews in Europe
during World War II. For instance, Menachem
Begin, prime minister of Israel from 1977 to 1983,
was jailed by Soviet authorities for Zionist activities
until the Nazi invasion in 1941. However, rather
than stay in Europe to fight the Nazis, Begin left for
Palestine, where he waged guerrilla war for five
years in the name of Zionism. Begin was not alone
in his decision to fight for Zionism rather than the
survival of European Jews.
Notably, the antisemitism of most deniers leads
them to denounce Begin’s choice while, at the same
time, choosing to continue to believe that this fractious movement called Zionism could perpetrate a
worldwide hoax. Nearly all major deniers, in fact,
share a dual obsession with the Holocaust and with
Zionism and the State of Israel. The chief purveyor
of denier propaganda in the United States is the
California-based Institute for Historical Review
(IHR), which sells not only Holocaust denial books
and pamphlets but also critiques of Zionism and
religious Judaism. Willis Carto, head of the Liberty
Lobby, an anti-Israel political action group based in
Washington, D.C., founded the IHR. While there
has been much internecine fighting over the last

two decades at the IHR over money, Carto’s views
and those of the present directors (who include
Mark Weber, a formerly overtly neo-Nazi propagandist) are not far from each other. In another
twist, over the course of his battle with the current
IHR leaders, Carto conspiratorially accused Weber
of being a Zionist agent.
Weber also bangs the drum of equating Jews with
the Bolshevik Revolution, a practice begun by App
among U.S. deniers but going back to the revolution
itself among observers in both Europe and the
United States. While Weber is able to seize on certain truths about the Bolshevik Party that can tie it,
at least on the surface, to Jews (such as that many
prominent Bolshevik leaders, including Leon Trotsky, Lev Kamenev, and Grigori Zinoviev, were Jewish by birth), Zimmerman has pointed out that the
average Russian Jew was more attracted to Jewish
nationalist, Zionist, or democratic socialist parties
(Zimmerman, 128) than to Communist radicals such
as the Bolsheviks. Weber also repeats App’s error of
equating Zionism and communism. While there did
exist Marxist-Zionist parties, particularly in the early
days of the Israeli state, the backing of the Soviet
Union for countries hostile to Israel after the 1967
Arab-Israeli war was a coup de grâce for any alliance
between two ideologies that are, by nature, diametrically opposed (Zionism is a form of nationalism,
while communism is international in its aims).
It can thus be seen that Holocaust denial is a conspiracy theory that seeks to place Jews behind an
international movement to promote a falsehood for
monetary gain. In this way, Holocaust denial is no
different than many other previous forms of antisemitism, which imputed to Jews monetary greed
as well as a conspiratorial air. Besides the haphazard
manner in which deniers have chosen to lump all
Jews together, regardless of religious or political orientation, as perpetrators of this “hoax,” deniers also
engage in efforts at pseudoscience to try to prove
their point of view regarding the Holocaust. To
date, none of their efforts has made any lasting
impression on Holocaust historiography. While the
rational observer will conclude that this is a testament to the truth of the history of the Holocaust,
for the Holocaust deniers, it is merely one more
323

Hoover, J. Edgar

piece of evidence of a conspiracy to quash what
they believe to be the “real truth” about the fate of
Jews during World War II.
Andrew E. Mathis
See also: Antisemitism; Protocols of the Elders of
Zion.
References
Lipstadt, Deborah. 1993. Denying the Holocaust:
The Growing Assault on Truth and Memory. New
York: Plume.
Ridgeway, James. 1990. Blood in the Face. New
York: Thunder’s Mouth Press.
Shermer, Michael, and Alex Grobman. 2000.
Denying History: Who Says the Holocaust Never
Happened and Why Do They Say It? Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Zimmerman, John C. 2000. Holocaust Denial:
Demographics, Testimonies, and Ideologies. New
York: University Press of America.

Hoover, J. Edgar
J. Edgar Hoover was the longtime director of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, heading the
domestic security organization from 1924 until his
death in 1972, a span of nearly half a century that
witnessed four wars (three “hot” and one cold), the
Great Depression, and the civil rights movement.
All of these major events played a key role in the
controversial career of the man whose name is synonymous with the FBI. In fact, “Hoover” and “the
FBI” are often used interchangeably, and at least
one historian has written that this practice is hardly
inaccurate (Schrecker, 204). By the time of
Hoover’s death, it was scarcely thinkable that anyone else could be the director of the FBI.
Hoover’s FBI was renowned for the personal
professionalism of the agents (on which Hoover had
long insisted) and, at least in the early years, the
judiciousness with which Hoover often exercised
his police power. But any mention of judiciousness
would ring hollow in the ears of the many victims of
McCarthyism, one of the most prominent of
Hoover’s campaigns. The FBI’s files were the raw
data from which Joseph McCarthy and like-minded
politicians fomented hysteria over the potential
324

influence of Communist subversives in the United
States. Many innocent men and women were discredited and blacklisted by this fear; a whiff of leftwing sympathy was often enough to brand a person
a Communist sympathizer.
In one of the most glaring examples of this,
Hoover and the FBI played a key role in the 1954
discrediting of J. Robert Oppenheimer, who nine
years earlier had directed the design of the first
atomic bombs, which ultimately ended World War II
on U.S. terms. Based on a letter to Hoover—which
grossly exaggerated old evidence against Oppenheimer—the U.S. government eventually decided
that Oppenheimer was a security risk. There was so
little hard evidence against him that the House UnAmerican Activities Committee (HUAC) was forced
to acknowledge his loyalty at the same time that it
affirmed he was a security risk. Many sad stories
abound from the period; the early 1950s were a scary
time to be even a moderate dissenter in the United
States. Historians have rightly condemned the
McCarthyites for using the specter of communism to
curtail freedom and individual liberties. Tempering
such criticism, however, are recent revelations from
archives of the former Soviet Union, showing that
there were a large number of Soviet operatives in the
United States. Hoover and McCarthy were responding to a very real situation, but doing so in a way that
often victimized innocent people for their political
beliefs in the name of national security.
The same biases played a role in Hoover’s decision making during the 1960s. Although there is little question that he genuinely believed the radical
students’ and civil rights movements to be threats to
the nation’s security, these assessments were ultimately political ones. The same suspicion of radicalism that had characterized his assessment of the
Communist threat colored his analysis of the liberal
1960s as well. Hoover became convinced that the
increasingly radical civil rights movement posed a
grave threat to the country and must be stopped.
One radical historian writes that internal FBI
memos “discussed finding a black leader to replace
King,” and “as a Senate report on the FBI said in
1976, the FBI tried ‘to destroy Dr. Martin Luther
King’” (Zinn, 462).

House Un-American Activities Committee

Discussions of this sort are always politically
charged, and suspicion can easily be cast on some of
the more outlandish claims made about the FBI’s
conspiracies (such as its role in covering up UFOs).
Such verification from the U.S. Senate, however, is
among the evidence that suggests that there is fire
for this smoke. The columnist Jack Anderson
agreed. Despite the kind words he wrote (perhaps
moved in the wake of the director’s then-recent
death), Anderson was in fact quite critical of Hoover.
Anderson felt it “hypocritical not to point out” the
FBI’s recent tendency to go “beyond its jurisdiction
to investigate the business dealings, sex habits and
personal affairs of prominent Americans.” In fact,
Anderson was quite critical of Hoover, and the misuse of power and access that Anderson mentioned
has come to be one of Hoover’s enduring legacies.
David Hecht
See also: Anticommunism; COINTELPRO; Federal
Bureau of Investigation; House Un-American
Activities Committee; Kennedy, John F.,
Assassination of; King, Martin Luther, Jr.,
Assassination of; McCarthy, Joseph.
References
Cooke, Alistair. 1950. A Generation on Trial: USA
vs. Alger Hiss. New York: Knopf.
Gentry, Curt. 1991. J. Edgar Hoover: The Man and
the Secrets. New York: Norton.
Powers, Richard Gid. 1986. Secrecy and Power: The
Secret Life of J. Edgar Hoover. New York: Free
Press.
Schrecker, Ellen. 1998. Many Are the Crimes:
McCarthyism in America. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Stern, Philip. 1969. The Oppenheimer Case:
Security on Trial. New York: HarperCollins.
Zinn, Howard. 1980. A People’s History of the
United States. New York: Harper & Row.

House Un-American Activities Committee
The House Special Committee to Investigate UnAmerican Activities was established in May 1938
when the House of Representatives voted 191 to 41
to authorize an eight-month investigation into “the
extent, character, and objects of un-American propaganda activities in the United States.” The House
would vote yearly extensions of the committee’s mandate through 1944. When the committee chairman,

Texas Democrat Martin Dies, retired at the end of
that year, its termination appeared likely. But when
Congress convened in 1945, Mississippi Democrat
John E. Rankin successfully pushed through a vote to
make the committee, renamed the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC), into a permanent standing committee. With its ever-escalating
investigation of suspected Communists, this committee at times seemed to turn conspiracy fears into a
national policy.
The moving force behind the adoption of the 1938
resolution was a Jewish lawmaker from New York,
Samuel Dickstein, whose primary target was proNazi groups and propaganda. By 1940, however, the
HUAC’s focus became Communist activities. Standard accounts accuse Dies of exploiting the HUAC
to tar the New Deal and liberals as subversives. But
at least as responsible was the Nazi-Soviet pact of
August 1939 and the resulting shift in the party line
that made the U.S. Communist Party (CPUSA) the
spearhead in resisting U.S. preparedness.
Hitler’s invasion of the Soviet Union and the
accompanying reversal of the CPUSA line followed
by the wartime U.S.-Soviet alliance led the HUAC
to keep a low profile. Two changes were responsible
for its resurgence. One was the heating up of the
cold war and the second was the Republican capture of the House in the 1946 elections, with the
result that New Jersey Republican J. Parnell
Thomas became the new HUAC chair.
In October 1947, the Thomas Committee won
newspaper headlines with an investigation of Communist infiltration into the Hollywood movie industry. The high point was the questioning of ten writers and directors about their membership in
subversive organizations. On order from the Communist Party, the so-called Hollywood Ten refused
to answer on First Amendment grounds and were
convicted and imprisoned for contempt of Congress. In response, the movie industry adopted a
“blacklist” of suspected Communist sympathizers—
with many of the names on the list supplied by the
HUAC and its staff. The movie industry’s model was
followed in other fields such as radio and television.
The high point of the HUAC’s success and influence came in 1948 from its hearings into Communist
325

House Un-American Activities Committee

infiltration into the U.S. government. Its prize witness was Elizabeth Bentley, the former lover and
accomplice of Soviet agent Jacob Golos. Persons
named by Bentley as supplying secret information
included the high-ranking Treasury Department
official Harry Dexter White, former presidential
economic adviser Lauchlin Currie, William Remington of the War Production Board, and Maurice
Halperin of the Office of Strategic Services.
Although hopes of profiting from the publicity led
Bentley to embellish the truth at times, the substance of her account—despite accusations to the
contrary then and since—was accurate
Bentley’s testimony before the HUAC did not
add to what she had previously told the Federal
Bureau of Investigation. More of an HUAC coup
grew out of the follow-up testimony of Time magazine editor Whittaker Chambers. Among those
Chambers named as members of a secret Communist underground in Washington was Alger Hiss, a
former high official in the State Department and
then president of the Carnegie Endowment of
International Peace. Materials turned over by Igor
Gouzenko when he had defected from the Soviet
embassy in Canada had unmistakenly pointed to
Hiss as a Soviet spy, and he had been quietly eased
out of government service. But the HUAC did not
have this information and Hiss put on such a slick
performance when testifying that the HUAC
would have dropped the matter if not for Republican congressman Richard M. Nixon of California.
Nixon would be vindicated when Chambers, in
reply to a libel suit by Hiss, revealed photocopies of
secret government documents given him by Hiss
for transmission to the Soviets. Hiss could not be
prosecuted for espionage because of the statute of
limitations, but he was indicted for and convicted
of perjury.
In 1948, Nixon joined with fellow HUAC member Karl Mundt, Republican from South Dakota, to
introduce what became the Internal Security Act of
1950, requiring “Communist-action” and “Communist-front” organizations to register.
The Democratic recapture of control of the
House in 1948 meant that Thomas was out as
HUAC chair, and in 1952 would be forced to resign
326

from Congress after conviction for payroll padding.
His successors—except for Pennsylvania Democrat
Francis E. Walter, chair 1955–1963—were not formidable personalities.
From the start, the HUAC had its faults. Some of
its leading figures—such as Thomas and Rankin—
were not simply anticommunists but racists and
antisemites. The committee was prone to making
sweeping generalizations on insufficient evidence.
Not all its informants had the firsthand knowledge
of Communist activities that Bentley or former
Daily Worker editor Louis Bundez did and even
they fell into the trap of exaggerating to enhance
their self-importance, while others were simply
frauds. Inevitably, mistakes occurred when individuals were wrongly named as Communists or Communist sympathizers. The continuing pressure to
retain newspaper headlines—a pressure heightened by the successes along that line by Wisconsin
Republican Senator Joseph McCarthy—aggravated
those failings.
On the other hand, those who refused to testify
on the grounds of the Fifth Amendment’s guarantee against self-incrimination were safe from prosecution. Up through 1960, the Supreme Court
rebuffed most legal challenges to the HUAC. Those
who wished to repent of past involvement were
given ample opportunity to do so. Those who took
advantage of that opportunity—such as movie
director Elia Kazan—would be vilified by the same
people who were simultaneously accusing the
HUAC of running roughshod over innocent individuals. As for the complaints about guilt by association, a person’s associates have always been used as
a guide to their evaluation. Most importantly, Communist infiltration of government and key opinioninfluencing institutions was no paranoid delusion
but a dangerous reality.
The lead in attacking the HUAC came from
Communists and fellow travelers who had pressing
reasons for not wanting a close look at their activities. The attack was joined by many liberals. Some
were motivated by a sincere concern about what
they saw as a threat to civil liberties; others because
they saw the HUAC as a weapon in the hands of
supporters of a rival right-wing political agenda.

House Un-American Activities Committee

H. A. Smith swears in Rep. J. Parnell Thomas for the House Un-American Activities Committee; also shown are Reps.
Richard B. Vail, John McDowell, Richard M. Nixon, and John J. Delaney. (Library of Congress)

The HUAC retained strong congressional support
through the 1950s but the tide began to shift in the
1960s. A violent confrontation between police and
protesters in May 1960 when the HUAC held hearings in San Francisco signaled a renewed and more
aggressive campaign against the HUAC by supporters of the emerging New Left joined with the remnants of the Old Left and such longtime anti-HUAC
organizations as the American Civil Liberties Union.
At the same time, the HUAC faced an increasingly
hostile Supreme Court majority led by Chief Justice
Earl Warren, while the easing of cold war tensions
undercut popular support. To appease its critics, in
the mid-1960s the HUAC turned the focus of its
attention on the Ku Klux Klan. In 1969 Democratic
Congressman Richard I. Ichord of Missouri took the
lead in reorganizing the HUAC into the House
Internal Security Committee with a more narrowly
defined mandate.

But these changes failed to satisfy the HUAC’s
foes. The final blow was the Watergate scandal
when HUAC opponents took advantage of Nixon’s
disgrace to push through the committee’s termination in January 1975.
John Braeman
See also: Anticommunism; Chambers, Whittaker;
Hiss, Alger; Hollywood Ten; Hoover, J. Edgar;
McCarthy, Joseph.
References
Bentley, Eric, ed. 2002. Thirty Years of Treason:
Excerpts from the Hearings of the House UnAmerican Activities Committee 1938–1968.
Reprint ed. New York: Thunder’s Mouth PressNation Books.
Carr, Robert K. 1952. The House Committee on UnAmerican Activities, 1945–1950. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Goodman, Walter. 1968. The Committee: The
Extraordinary Career of the House Committee on

327

Hughes, Howard

Un-American Activities. New York: Farrar, Straus,
and Giroux.
Olmsted, Kathryn S. 2002. Red Spy Queen: A
Biography of Elizabeth Bentley. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press.
Packer, Herbert. 1962. Ex-Communist Witnesses:
Four Studies in Fact Finding. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Tanenhaus, Sam. 1997. Whittaker Chambers. New
York: Random House.
Weinstein, Allen. 1978. Perjury: The Hiss-Chambers
Case. New York: Random House.

Hughes, Howard
Howard Hughes (1905–1976) was a dashing and
handsome young billionaire, airline owner, and Hollywood producer who gradually became a legendary
recluse. His prolonged hermit like existence and
fabulous wealth eventually inspired widespread and
often conspiracy-minded interest in his bizarre dayto-day life, as well as in his involvement with a variety of schemes, scandals, and hoaxes. Hughes’s
father was the inventor of a three-headed drill bit
that revolutionized the oil business. The subsequent
wealth of the Hughes Tool Company, however, did
not protect Hughes’s parents from fatal health problems, giving the wealthy orphan a lifelong fear of
germs and contamination. As a twenty-year-old,
Hughes moved to Hollywood and became a movie
producer, wooing screen starlets and fostering such
swashbuckling titles as Hell’s Angels, Son of Sinbad,
and The Outlaw. At the same time, Hughes shifted
the family’s toolmaking fortune into aviation, even
designing his own aircraft and setting records for air
speed and transcontinental travel.
As Hughes’s empire grew, it encompassed Trans
World Airlines and RKO Pictures, and soon gained
a lucrative role as the U.S. military’s chief electronics supplier. But Hughes’s business practices were
aggressive and occasionally involved intimidation
and bribery. In the 1940s he found himself fighting
allegations of mismanagement and illegal business
practices. Although his high profile and shadowy
deals soon made him a target of surveillance by J.
Edgar Hoover’s FBI, Hughes was able to forge a
strong relationship with the CIA, leading Hughes
328

Aircraft into the espionage business during the cold
war.
By the late 1950s, however, Hughes’s emotional
state began to deteriorate, leading him into personal
isolation. His financial empire began to weaken, and
he took refuge in a series of secret hideaways in California, Nevada, the Caribbean, South America, and
Europe. For the latter part of his life, Hughes was
seen by virtually no one but his assistants. When
summoned by the press, or by the courts, he was
famously not available, and persistent rumors developed that he was dead and aides were running the
empire in his name.
In truth, Hughes was alive, but had adopted—
apparently voluntarily—a sedentary life in which he
watched movies, abused drugs, and slept in darkened rooms beyond the reach of his own security
staff. His obsession with germs gradually became
overwhelming. He began to insist that aides use
white gloves when typing memos for his attention.
When touching objects (or, rarely, his aides), he
insisted on using layers of tissue paper to avoid
direct contact.
Despite his paralyzing fears, however, by some
accounts Hughes continued to run his empire, and
at times his presence was quite active in sensational
public affairs. In the late 1960s, for instance,
Hughes was cloistered in Las Vegas and discovered
that the U.S. government was planning to test a
hydrogen bomb some 100 miles away. He became
obsessed with stopping the test, even attempting to
bribe President Lyndon Johnson to stop it. Some
years later, Hughes’s relationship with President
Richard Nixon became a magnet for allegations of
conspiracy, including rumors (of doubtful veracity)
that the infamous eighteen-second gap in the Watergate tapes was made in order to erase a conversation
about Hughes’s illegal financial dealings with the
president. In 1972, another scandal emerged when
what seemed to be Hughes’s memoirs appeared in
bookstores, quickly producing $1 million in sales.
However, Hughes had not written or authorized the
book, and decided to disclaim it, a task made more
difficult because he remained unwilling to appear in
public. Finally, a conference call with reporters
allowed Hughes to denounce the bogus autobiogra-

The American millionaire businessman, film director, and aviator, Howard Hughes, in his flying goggles, 1936. (HultonDeutsch Collection/Corbis)

329

Hutchinson, Anne

phy, simultaneously demonstrating to the world that
the mysterious billionaire was still alive.
Hughes died in 1976 while en route to a Houston
hospital from his Acapulco hideaway. Because he
died without an official will, the struggle over his
fortune was fought out in courts for years. One of
the prime beneficiaries of his money was the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, once a tax shelter but now a world-class center of scientific
research and funding. In a final ironic twist, one of
the fruits of the Institute’s research—a procedure
for kidney dialysis—might have prevented Hughes’s
calamitous airborne death. It would have given the
hermit billionaire yet another opportunity to
intrigue the world.
James J. Kimble
See also: Central Intelligence Agency; Cold War;
Federal Bureau of Investigation; Hoover, J. Edgar;
Johnson, Lyndon B.; Nixon, Richard; Watergate.
References
Brown, Peter Harry, and Pat H. Broeske. 1996.
Howard Hughes: The Untold Story. New York:
Penguin.
Choppin, Purnell W. 1998. “From a Three-Headed
Bit to a Major Philanthropy: The Surprising
Legacy of Howard Hughes.” Proceedings of the
American Philosophical Society 142 (3): 425–431.
Fay, Stephen, Lewis Chester, and Magnus Linklater.
1972. Hoax: The Inside Story of the Howard
Hughes–Clifford Irving Affair. New York: Viking
Press.
Phelan, James. 1976. Howard Hughes: The Hidden
Years. New York: Random House.

Hutchinson, Anne
With Roger Williams, Anne Hutchinson is the most
famous American religious separatist of the seventeenth century. She, with Williams, is also one of the
first Americans to be publicly subjected to a methodical manipulation and eventual banishment by the
defenders of New England orthodoxy, a process that,
for some commentators, verged on a conspiracy.
Had it not been for Hutchinson’s chief opponent,
John Winthrop, the influential governor of Massachusetts Bay, there is a chance that the controversy
would have never boiled over and that Hutchinson
330

and her followers would have permanently altered
the basic nature of the Puritan church. But Hutchinson left New Englanders not with an assurance of
providence, but rather a long-lasting unease over the
unfortunate turn of events that led to her trial and
banishment.
Impatient with the lukewarm spirit of her church
in Lincolnshire, Hutchinson and her family followed her preacher, John Cotton, to the Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1634. Initially, the situation in
Boston suited Hutchinson well; she was pleased
that, unlike her Lincolnshire church, the Congregationalist churches in Boston were neither state
sanctioned nor composed “automatically” of members of the community, but rather of those believers
who attested to the spirit. After a time, Hutchinson
was admitted to the church, and she began meeting
with women periodically to discuss the sermons of
Cotton and John Wilson, a second minister of the
Boston church.
A close reader of scriptures and a thoroughgoing
mystic, Hutchinson began to amplify Cotton’s sermons and to criticize Wilson’s. Where Cotton’s sermons emphasized free grace as the only condition
of salvation and the idea that the Holy Spirit dwells
in all Christians, Wilson’s emphasized good works as
a necessary condition for sanctity. Good works,
Hutchinson taught, are the fruits of, not the condition for, salvation. She began to state that others in
the Massachusetts congregation, like many members of the Church of England, were not saved
because they were too reliant on a sanctity derived
from works.
Hutchinson’s meetings grew in attendance and
frequency, and they began to attract an influential,
well-to-do following throughout Boston that
included Henry Vane, then the governor of the
colony. In June 1636, Hutchinson’s brother-in-law
John Wheelwright, a minister who shared Hutchinson’s views on “free grace” and the indwelling of the
Holy Spirit, arrived from England as the controversy
was developing. Hutchinson’s followers, who by this
time comprised the majority, proposed that the
church be reformed and that Wheelwright be
appointed as the second teacher. John Winthrop, the
once and future governor of Massachusetts Bay and

Hutchinson, Anne

firm adherent to an exclusionist theology, strongly
opposed the appointment and was successful in
blocking it. He believed that Wheelwright and the
Hutchinsonians were straying so far from orthodoxy
that they threatened to tear apart the nonseparatist
fabric of the Puritan community. When a deputation
of clergy visited Hutchinson in December 1636,
they were disturbed to hear Hutchinson express
doubts whether the ministers of Massachusetts were
saved (excepting, of course, Cotton and Wheelwright). Hutchinson was intelligent and persuasive,
but her perceived air of superiority must have
seemed to the church fathers especially inappropriate coming from a woman. Winthrop in particular
had no patience for women who (as he wrote in his
journal) “meddle in such things as are proper for
men, whose minds are stronger.”
In Winthrop’s view—and there is no reason to
believe he was mistaken—if Hutchinson’s critique of
the Church of England was allowed to go unchallenged, nothing would keep her from critiquing and
undoing the Massachusetts churches. Her views
were held by the leaders of the colony to be Antinomian (“against the law”). Winthrop and others
charged that the Antinomians looked for guidance
too much from the untrained, unregulated self and
not enough from the church and its ministers. As
election time for a new governor drew near at the
beginning of 1637, political maneuvering by
Winthrop and other colony leaders relocated the
elections to Newtown (now Cambridge) and thus
took away the Antinomian majority vote. Winthrop
was elected governor, while Vane was voted out of
public office. After the shift in power was completed,
a synod of all the ministers in the Bay was called that
proclaimed the errors of the dissidents, including
those of Hutchinson and the Antinomians. The General Court banished Wheelwright, who moved north
to New Hampshire territory. Next, the General
Court turned to Hutchinson herself. Her offense was
political as well as religious, and she was indicted for
“traducing the ministers and their ministry.”
Hutchinson was given two trials: one for disturbing the peace by the state and the other for heresy

by the church. Winthrop cross-examined Hutchinson, and she began to lose her public support as the
trials wore on. Hutchinson did little to keep that
support in place by making the controversial claim
that God spoke to her “by immediate revelation.”
Such a statement was a recognized heresy in the
Puritan church, and, arguably, any orthodox Protestant community, for self-preservation, would have
reacted to Hutchinson in the same way the Massachusetts Bay Colony did. Hutchinson was excommunicated from the church—ironically, by the sanction of Cotton, who, after being forced to choose
between the Antinomians and the status quo, joined
the rest of the court in condemning her—and she
was driven from Boston in March 1638. Hutchinson’s followers were made to admit their errors by
being forbidden to bear arms—a strong sentence in
the day.
After Hutchinson’s banishment, an account of
the proceedings was sent to England to show that
Massachusetts had no toleration for Antinomianism. Hutchinson withdrew to Rhode Island. When
she miscarried later that year, Winthrop and others
throughout New England took it as a conclusive
sign of providential justice. Later the Hutchinsons
relocated to New York. Her death there at the
hands of the Indians in 1643 confirmed again for
many in Boston that her judgment had been just.
Although some modern historians defend Winthrop’s handling of the Antinomian controversy as a
necessary act of self-preservation, others critique it
as deplorable, and see it as one of the more sordid
instances of the Puritan era’s sexism and intolerance, even if Hutchinson displayed a degree of
intolerance herself.
Bryan L. Moore
See also: Puritans.
References
Battis, Emery. 1962. Saints and Sectaries: Anne
Hutchinson and the Antinomian Controversy in
the Massachusetts Bay Colony. Chapel Hill:
Universtity of North Carolina Press.
Hall, David D. 1990. The Antinomian Controversy,
1636–1638: A Documentary History. 2d ed.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

331

I
Identification Cards
Many people have seen the idea of identification (ID)
cards as a conspiracy against the liberty of individuals;
those on the Right have usually drawn on biblical
prohesies to warn against ID cards, while those on
the Left have feared the introduction of increasing
government surveillance and control of workers.
Opponents of mandatory or quasi-mandatory
identification cards on the religious Right have
pointed to the Bible’s warning against the “sin of
David,” whom Satan incited to conduct a census and
whom God punished for thus “numbering” the people (1 Chronicles 21). Caesar’s all-empire registration that took Joseph and Mary to Bethlehem (Luke
2) has similarly colored the view of many Americans
that any government information collection for tax
purposes is part of a wider conspiracy. Likewise, the
introduction of a government-assigned number in
order to take up a job was viewed as fulfillment of
the biblical prophecy of the “mark of the beast” in
Revelation 13: “no man might buy or sell, save he
that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the
number of his name.” The widening use of ID numbers is said to be mandated by international organizations such as the United Nations (UN) and the
European Community, as part of the New World
Order predicted in Daniel 7:23 and Revelation
13:4–8. The Social Security Administration’s “Enumeration at Birth” program, in which newborns are
assigned Social Security Numbers (SSNs), is part of
a “global plan for enumeration,” mandated by the
UN. New identification technology is seen as partic-

ularly worrisome, with fears, for example, that bar
codes contain the number 666, the mark of the
beast. On the Left, the assignment of SSNs to workers in the 1930s produced concerns, for example by
the United Mineworkers, of a potential employers’
“blacklist” of troublemaking laborers. However,
much of the opposition to the SSN was fueled by
opposition to President Roosevelt’s New Deal itself,
and made use of conspiratorial accusations largely as
a rhetorical flourish. Just before the 1936 election,
Republican presidential candidate Alf Landon asked
rhetorically if millions of Americans would now be
fingerprinted and photographed and “opened for
federal snooping.” The Hearst newspapers asked,
“Do you want a tag and a number in the name of
false security?” and spread the rumor that all workers would be required to wear dog tags displaying
the SSN.
Although the fears and conspiracy theories that
met the introduction of the SSN can now seem farfetched, it is nevertheless the case that the numbers
have become all-purpose identifiers, despite assurances at the time, and fears about the erosion of liberty and privacy are not unfounded. However, the
United States does not have a national ID card as
other countries do. The most-commonly checked
government IDs are the driver’s licenses issued by
the fifty states, but less than 20 percent of the population has a U.S. passport. More than 7,000 different jurisdictions issue all manner of birth certificates, which are the “breeder documents” upon
which other IDs are based.
333

Identification Cards

Proponents of universal ID cards start from the
observation that the United States already has a de
facto national ID card, in the form of driver’s licenses,
and a national ID number, in the form of the SSN. In
the wake of the terrorist attack on September 11, for
example, advocates for a national ID card argued that
the existing system had to be made more robust by
combining the existing cards into one.
In a similar vein, opponents of national ID cards
suggest that the current scattered system is but the
slippery slope to the introduction of a national ID.
These skeptics assert that, because totalitarian systems rely on ID cards (Nazi Germany’s IBMsupplied ID system, the Soviet internal passport,
and apartheid South Africa’s pass system being key
examples), ID cards themselves represent the thin
edge of the wedge of a Big Brother state apparatus,
which could be introduced by stealth and in a piecemeal fashion, via small technological improvements
and policy changes. Mainstream civil liberties and
privacy advocates such as the American Civil Liberties Union, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, the
Electronic Privacy Information Center, and the Privacy Foundation do not see any conspiracy in this,
although slippery-slope arguments can sometimes
play the same role as conspiracy theory in viewing
together what would otherwise be unrelated, disparate events. Sometimes privacy advocates will
employ the hint of conspiracy to simplify the presentation of what is really an argument about incremental, technological determinism.
A rather different group of ID opponents does see
a literal conspiracy. In U.S. history there is a longstanding populist, right-wing fear of the encroachment of “big government” into the life of the average
American, and ID cards are often seen as part of a
larger conspiracy of the federal government (and the
so-called New World Order) to control the private
life of citizens. Members of the Patriot movement, in
groups such as the Militia of Montana and the Posse
Comitatus, have attempted to rescind or revoke their
own driver’s licenses or SSNs, in a process called
“asseveration.” For example, Oklahoma City bombing conspirator Terry Nichols had at one point attempted to back out of a $20,000 debt by attempting
to repudiate his U.S. citzenship; he destroyed his
334

driver’s license, passport, and voter registration card.
Similar ID-revocation techniques have been used in
attempts to avoid child-support payments, back
taxes, gun registration, seatbelt laws, speed limits,
and similar infringements on “sovereign” citizens.
These groups describe ID cards as part of a conspiracy to hook citizens into rejecting their “sovereign” status. Even the ZIP code is feared as a form of
“adhesion contract” to nullify sovereignty. The idea
of ID cards as an antisovereign conspiracy is generally employed as part of a strategy for avoiding taxes
or other financial burdens, although this kind of tax
avoidance has been universally unsuccessful. There
is, however, a thriving business in running seminars
on the subject, at which attendees might pay several
hundred dollars to acquire the appropriate paperwork, plus the ability to themselves hold similar seminars, forming a kind of multilevel-marketing campaign for the anti-ID card conspiracy theory.
In the United States “liberty” is often a code word
for guns, and even fairly mainstream opponents of
gun registration sometimes see ID cards as part of a
much larger pattern, in which “fascist” government
agencies such as the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
and Firearms (BATF) is targeting gun owners and
the “politically incorrect.” The Brady Bill requires
that ID such as a driver’s license be shown and
checked against a federal database as part of a handgun sale, which has led the gun lobby to equate registration and ID cards with gun control.
New forms of technology provoke similar responses from opponents of identification cards.
“Smart” cards, which can carry several megabytes of
data, are frequently described as the next step in
bringing about one-world government tracking of all
persons; the use of such smart cards on military
bases has been described as a pilot project to move
the entire civilian population to a trackable, cashless
society. Biometrics such as facial recognition, and
location tracking via GPS (Global Positioning Satellite), are seen as part of the same plan. The next step
is implantable ID, such as the Digital Angel and
Verichip products from Applied Digital Solutions.
The religious Right note that these products in part
fulfill the design specification of Revelation 13:16
that speaks of “a mark in their right hand, or in their

Illuminati

foreheads.” Timothy McVeigh, the Oklohoma
bomber, spoke of the army implanting a computer
chip in his buttocks during the Gulf War, but more
mainstream commentators now note that such technology is becoming more likely. For the conspiracyminded, high-tech ID systems are seen as systems
not just for identification, but for mind control.
Andrew Schulman
See also: Income Tax and the Internal Revenue
Service; Militias; Mind Control; New World Order;
Posse Comitatus; Universal Price Codes.
References
Abanes, Richard. 1996. American Militias: Rebellion,
Racism, and Religion. Downers Grove, IL:
InterVarsity Press.
Boyer, Paul. 1992. When Time Shall Be No More:
Prophecy Belief in Modern American Culture.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Cohen, Patricia Cline. 1982. A Calculating People:
The Spread of Numeracy in Early America.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Schulman, Andrew. 2002. “The US/Mexico Border
Crossing Card (BCC): A Case Study in Biometric,
Machine-Readable ID.” http://www.sonic.net/
~undoc/bccnew.doc.
Smith, Robert Ellis. 2000. Ben Franklin’s Web Site:
Privacy and Curiosity from Plymouth Rock to the
Internet. Providence, RI: Privacy Journal.
Stern, Kenneth S. 1996. A Force upon the Plain: The
American Militia Movement and the Politics of
Hate. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.

Illuminati
The Order of the Illuminati was a short-lived secret
society in eighteenth-century Germany that became
the linchpin of countless conspiracy theories and
works of historical and religious speculation, ranging
from reactionary attacks on the French Revolution
to the countercultural writings of the 1960s and
1970s and through to the religious Right in the present. In terms of sheer longevity and versatility, few
conspiracy theory “villains” can match the record of
the Illuminati.
Origins
The legend began in the southwest German state of
Bavaria, a militantly Catholic realm where the Re-

formation and the Enlightenment had been stoutly
resisted by both the ruling family and the Jesuit
clergy who controlled the cultural institutions. The
Order of the Illuminati was born in the febrile brain
of Dr. Adam Weishaupt, a professor of Canon Law at
Bavaria’s most prestigious educational institution, the
University of Ingolstadt. A leader of the liberal faction within the university that supported the introduction of non-Catholic books and scientific subjects
into the university curriculum, Weishaupt felt that
Jesuit rivals were sabotaging his career, and determined that only a secret organization could ever succeed in spreading the secular, rationalistic ideas of
the Enlightenment in such a hostile environment.
Secret societies and fraternal orders were something of a rage among the elites of Europe and
America during the eighteenth century. Living in a
world where traditional beliefs seemed increasingly
inadequate and traditional society was decaying,
many sought out deeper knowledge and new forms
of sociability to go with them. The exotic rituals and
quasi-pagan “mysteries” available to initiates in
Freemasonry and similar institutions were immensely appealing, and at their best taught a more
modern and open-minded value system than the
official culture of the day. Membership was also an
excellent way for ambitious men to make social and
professional connections.
Weishaupt’s new secret society was launched 1
May 1776, with five members. Loosely based on
Masonic lodges, Illuminati chapters were intended
to become “schools of wisdom” (Stauffer, 150), in
which new ideas could be freely taught, away from
the prying eyes of priests and public officials.
Weishaupt originally planned three “grades” of Illuminati, Novice, Minerval, and Illuminated Minerval, promising higher grades to come. The order
was structured in a hierarchical, cultlike fashion in
which the higher-ranking members were supposed
to control the actions and thinking of their subordinates. Each novice—young, rich, impressionable
men were the preferred recruits—was to be instructed by a single Minerval who was to keep the
identities of the other members secret. Advancement required the novitiate to prepare detailed
reports on his life and character, including the
335

Illuminati

books he owned and the names of his enemies, and
to recruit new candidates. Then finally, after two
years of study, the novice was elevated to Minerval
status and got to attend Illuminati gatherings. Minervals were to form a kind of secret Enlightenment
university hidden within the existing institutions of
the society, where the order would work to see that
its members were highly placed.
This was a bold plan to spread an intellectual revolution through Catholic Europe, frightening in the
degree to which it sought to control its agents, but
it amounted to relatively little in practice. Intent on
personal, dictatorial command of the order,
Weishaupt quarreled frequently with other leading
members, and the total number of Illuminati rose
to no more than perhaps sixty in its first four years
of existence.
The order’s fortunes took a temporary turn for the
better when Baron Adolf Franz Friederich Knigge,
a well-connected diplomat and leading Mason from
the north of Germany, joined in 1780. The accession
of Knigge greatly increased the geographic reach
and social prestige of Illuminism, and created an
alliance with Freemasonry that proved the key to
the order’s brief period of expansion. Knigge added
a number of new grades, with cheeky, imposing
titles like Priest, Prince, and Magus, and expanded
the group’s recruitment to include not just impressionable young students but also experienced men
who already occupied positions of influence, especially Knigge’s Masonic colleagues. Several of the
new Illuminati grades corresponded to Masonic
degrees and provided easy points of access for
Masons into the higher ranks of the new order.
Under Knigge’s guidance, the Order of the Illuminati enjoyed its only period of real prestige or influence. Membership climbed into the thousands, and
reached outside Bavaria into a number of other
German-speaking states. A number of German
princes and nobles became Illuminati, as did such
lions of German culture as Goethe and Herder.
Suppression
Then, beginning in 1784, just at the peak of the
order’s popularity, the hammer came down. Duke
Charles Theodore of Bavaria issued a series of
336

edicts banning all voluntary associations and societies that had been created without government
permission, in time naming the Illuminati specifically as one of the outlawed groups. An investigation was begun and Illuminati who held any kind of
official position in the army, clergy, government, or
educational system were forced to confess and
recant their membership, promptly and sincerely,
or lose their jobs. As in many cases where a government tries to suppress a conspiratorial organization,
heavily embroidered confessions and lurid, semifictional tell-alls began appearing as the scandal
mounted. Weishaupt and Knigge escaped, but a
number of other leading Illuminati were arrested,
including one Xavier Zwack, a disgraced member
whose trove of letters and documents included
plans for creating a secret organization for women,
essays defending atheism and suicide, claims that
the Illuminati had the power of life or death over
their members, and information on secret ink,
counterfeiting, poison, and even abortion.
Conspiratorial Interpretations of History
A highly imaginative stew of prospective sin and
projected skullduggery, Zwack’s papers became the
basis for the Illuminati legend that mushroomed
almost simultaneously with the Bavarian order’s
final suppression in 1787. Its fame was first spread
by a host of German-language works published
attacking and defending the order, including several
intemperate productions from founder Adam
Weishaupt himself. Taking the seized documents
and the controversial literature out of its original
context, the embattled defenders of church and
king came to see the Illuminati as both representatives of, and the prime movers behind, all the insidious forces of innovation, free thought, and revolution that seemed to threaten their world. European
reactionaries simply refused to believe that such a
diabolical organization could be killed, seeing its
hand in the other major and minor political
upheavals of the eighteenth century.
The most notable and shocking of these developments, of course, was the French Revolution that
began in 1789. Once the French Jacobins had
pushed the country to regicide and mass murder in

Illuminati

the early 1790s, apologists for the old regime cast
about for explanations and many settled, improbably
enough, on the Bavarian Illuminati as the culprits.
The basics of the grand Illuminati conspiracy
theory were first mapped out by University of Edinburgh scientist John Robison, a Mason who gradually became convinced that the secrecy provided by
Masonic lodges and similar institutions “had been
used in every country for venting and propagating
sentiments in religion and politics, that could not
have been circulated in public without exposing the
author to great danger” (Robison). This protection
encouraged free thinkers and libertines to “become
more bold, and to teach doctrines subversive of all
our notions of morality . . . of all satisfaction and
contentment with our present life, so long as we live
in a state of civil subordination.” This insight might
have had some merit as a description of Europe’s
intellectual ferment during the eighteenth century,
but Robison literalized it into the charge that “AN
ASSOCIATION HAS BEEN FORMED for the
express purpose of ROOTING OUT ALL THE
RELIGIOUS ESTABLISHMENTS, AND OVERTURNING ALL THE EXISTING GOVERNMENTS OF EUROPE” (Stauffer, 203).
In his book Proofs of a Conspiracy, Robison outlined his theories in massive though often mistaken
detail, tracing the origins of the conspiracy back to
French Freemasons whose ideas had spread to
Germany and allegedly spawned the Illuminati.
Along with many of his contemporaries, Robison
believed that the Illuminati had not really been suppressed in 1787, but had merely gone underground
and assumed new and more dangerous guises.
Robison labored for sixty pages to establish a link
between the Bavarians and the French revolutionaries, relying on a few fleeting contacts between
some mid-level Illuminati leaders and two wellconnected French Masons who became prominent
French politicians during the 1790s, Mirabeau and
Talleyrand. Supposedly the French immediately
adopted Weishaupt’s plan “in all its branches,” creating “illuminated” lodges all over France, including, Robison claimed, the infamous Jacobin club
that produced the Revolution’s most radical and
bloodthirsty faction (Stauffer, 213).

Almost simultaneously with Robison, a French
writer was working out an even more elaborate version of the same theory. In Mémoires pour servir à
l’histoire du Jacobinisme (Memoirs Illustrating the
History of Jacobinism), the Jesuit priest Augustin
Barruel described a “triple conspiracy” of “sophistes”
specializing in “Impiety,” “Rebellion,” and “Anarchy.” According to Barruel, it all began with a conspiracy of philosophers, led by Enlightenment figures such as Voltaire and the Encyclopedists, whose
anti-Christian writings sapped the intellectual and
political prestige of the Catholic Church. At the
same time, Voltaire, Montesquieu, and Rousseau
expounded the doctrines of liberty and equality, and
Freemasons took up their cause, inculcating impressionable young men with the blasphemous notions
that “all men are equals and brothers; all men are
free.” The Illuminati then emerged to bring the
philosophers and Masons together behind a program of cultural and political revolution, seeking to
destroy not only the Christian churches and Christian monarchs of Europe, but “every religion natural
or revealed . . . every government . . . all civil society . . . all property whatsoever.” This “complete
academy of Conspirators” brought their plans to
fruition by creating the Jacobin clubs and fomenting
the French Revolution (Stauffer, 217–218).
Arrival in the United States
These Illuminati-based explanations of the French
Revolution and the other radical movements of the
time spread quickly to the United States, where war
with the French Republic seemed to be looming and
the Federalists in power were being severely criticized in the press. Many of these press critics were
political refugees from suppressed radical movements in England, Scotland, and Ireland and strong
sympathizers with the ideals of the French Revolution, adding fuel to a sense of alien subversion.
The authors of the Illuminati conspiracy theory
had warned the United States that it was in danger.
Robison claimed that the Bavarian Illuminati had
planted cells there before their official suppression,
and Barruel cried that the Illumines were coming
fresh from their successes in France: “As the plague
flies on the wings of the wind, so do their tri337

Illuminati

umphant legions infect America. . . . The immensity
of the ocean is but a feeble barrier against the universal conspiracy of the Sect” (Stauffer, 226–227).
Robison and Barruel found eager readers among
the Federalists, especially in New England, where
the legatees of the old Puritan clergy wielded great
political influence and deplored what they perceived as a declining level of religious belief since
colonial times. Believing that Thomas Jefferson’s
Democratic Republicans were in cahoots with the
French in any case, Federalists were all too prepared to believe that their political enemies might
be part of a much broader and deeper conspiracy
against not just George Washington and John
Adams, but religion and morality in general.
In the spring and summer of 1798, a full-fledged
Illuminati scare broke out, turning the conspiracy
theory into a leading topic of political debate and
contributing to the paranoid atmosphere that produced the Alien and Sedition Acts. Robison and
Barruel were endorsed in widely published and discussed sermons by some of New England’s most
famous divines. Leading off was Rev. Jedidiah
Morse, pastor of First Church, Charlestown, Massachusetts, and also America’s leading authority on
geography. Morse launched the controversy before
a large audience in Boston on 9 May, declared a day
of “solemn humiliation, fasting, and prayer” by
President John Adams. Morse published two other
Illuminati sermons later that year, along with innumerable newspaper articles defending and trying to
substantiate his charges. Pressed for specifics, he
named Thomas Jefferson, the figurehead and presidential candidate of a rapidly coalescing opposition
party, as the likely chief of the American Illuminati.
Although by no means universally accepted, even
by those of his own political persuasion, the Illuminati theory was given further sanction that summer
by Rev. David Tappan, a Harvard professor of divinity, and especially by Rev. Timothy Dwight, who as
president of Yale College was virtually the spiritual
leader of New England’s Congregational-Federalist
establishment. Having preached and written often
against the rise of “infidelity,” Dwight fell hard for
the Illuminati theory, lending his considerable prestige to one of the most histrionic of the attacks,
338

addressed to the people of New Haven during their
1798 Fourth of July celebration. Speaking on the
“The Duty of Americans in the Present Crisis,”
Dwight called upon his fellow citizens to stand
against these enemies, who embodied “the cruelty
and rapacity of the Beast,” lest their sons become
“the dragoons of Marat” and their “daughters the
concubines of the Illuminati” (Stauffer, 250–251).
Morse and Dwight were in deadly earnest, but
some Federalist politicians and publicists tried to
exploit the Illuminati fears for political gain. One of
Jefferson’s nastiest critics, newspaper editor
William Cobbett, helped oversee the publication of
Robison’s book in America, and Dwight’s politician
brother Theodore gave speeches and wrote articles
purporting to show that Jefferson was “the very
child of modern illumination, the foe of man, and
the enemy of his country” (Stauffer, 283).
Despite the large amounts of ink and breath that
Federalists expended on it, the Illuminati scare
largely fizzled out as a political phenomenon. The
opposition press ridiculed the charges and even
many Federalists were openly skeptical. What was
worse, Jeffersonian Republican journals such as the
Boston Independent Chronicle and the Philadelphia Aurora, and clever Republican orators such
New Haven’s Abraham Bishop, worked fairly successfully to turn the charges around. If there was
any real conspiracy to suborn the nation’s religious,
cultural, and political institutions, it was the one
being mounted by the “political priests” of New
England, who hoped to suppress the religious and
political freedoms that Americans enjoyed, and protect the privileges of New England’s tax-supported
Congregational churches, by smearing their political opponents and leading a witch-hunt for Illuminati and other subversives.
Ranging back through the region’s history to Puritan witch trials and blue laws, Democratic Republican critics depicted Federalist New England as a
benighted place where a “union of church and state”
labored to keep the people misinformed and docile.
Timothy Dwight was labeled the “Pope” of New
England, a cutting epithet in a country where the
Catholic Church was widely and deeply disdained.
Many of the articles and pamphlets were written

The Illuminatus! Trilogy

from the viewpoint of New England clergymen or
politicians who had been ostracized and sometimes
forced from their positions for their liberal political
opinions. The general tenor and strategy of the
attacks are captured in the title of John C. Ogden’s
pamphlet, A View of the New England Illuminati:
Who are Indefatigably Engaged in Destroying the
Religion and Government of the United States;
under a Feigned Regard for Their Safety. Along with
hundreds of newspaper articles by Ogden and others, Abraham Bishop’s widely reprinted speech and
pamphlet on “the extent and power of political delusion,” emanating from Dwight’s own stomping
grounds, proved highly popular and effective.
Although hysterical attacks on the Republicans
continued, the specific charge that they were part
of an Illuminati conspiracy dropped out of Federalist use once Jefferson assumed the presidency in
1801. Jefferson’s own allies kept up the countercharge for several more years as they tried unsuccessfully to gain power within the New England
states. Occasionally they came close to building a
conspiracy theory of their own, revolving around
the alleged “union of church and state.” In 1802,
Bishop published a kind of parody of Robison’s
book, also titled Proofs of a Conspiracy, that documented the means by which New England’s Federalist elite clung to power and repressed dissent.
Aftermath
Although never mainstream again after 1800, the
Robison-Barruel theory of the Illuminati as secret
prime movers in world events has figured in the
beliefs of many, if not most, major conservative conspiracy theorists since that time. Antisemites, Christian Identity, Nesta Webster, the John Birch Society, and the far Right, whose warnings about the
New World Order pervade the Internet—all find
Robison’s material too good to pass up and assign a
major role to the Illuminati as progenitors or allies
of whatever group each particular writer fears. Religious reactionaries have been especially attracted to
the Illuminati legend, which makes the forces of
secularism seem so efficient, powerful, and dangerous. By the same token, but from the other end of
the political spectrum, many Americans influenced

by the 1960s counterculture have embraced belief
in the Illuminati, sometimes tongue-in-cheek or
only imaginatively, out of an attraction for the idea
of a secret network of enlightened individuals who
might be able to spread hidden knowledge and
bring about sweeping cultural, social, and political
change.
Jeffrey L. Pasley
See also: Antisemitism; Barruel, Abbé;
Freemasonry; The Illuminatus! Trilogy; John Birch
Society; Morse, Jedidiah; New World Order;
Robison, John.
References
Briceland, Alan V. 1976. “The Philadelphia Aurora,
the New England Illuminati, and the Election of
1800.” Pennsylvania Magazine of History and
Biography 50 (January): 3–36.
Morse, James King. [1939] 1967. Jedidiah Morse: A
Champion of New England Orthodoxy. New
York: AMS Press.
Robison, John. 1798. Proofs of a Conspiracy—
Against All the Religions and Governments of
Europe, Carried On in the Secret Meetings of
Freemasons, Illuminati and Reading Societies. 4th
ed. London: T. Cadell.
Stauffer, Vernon. [1918] 1967. New England and the
Bavarian Illuminati. New York: Russell and
Russell.
Waldstreicher, David, and Stephen R. Grossbart.
1998. “Abraham Bishop’s Vocation; or, the
Mediation of American Politics.” Journal of the
Early Republic 18 (Winter): 617–657.

The Illuminatus! Trilogy
The Illuminatus! Trilogy, “a fairy tale for paranoids,”
is a cult classic coauthored by Robert Shea (1933–
1994) and Robert Anton Wilson (1938–), former
editors of Playboy magazine. Intrigue—and lots of
sex, drugs, and rock and roll—characterize this psychedelic epic that defies paraphrase. Thirteen years
after its 1975 publication, the 800-page trilogy was
the best-selling trade science-fiction paperback in
the United States. The novel won the 1986
Prometheus Hall of Fame Award and was adapted
into a ten-hour rock opera at London’s National
Theatre.
339

The Illuminatus! Trilogy

Structure of the Novel
The form and the content of this novel focus on an
ancient struggle between anarchy and authority.
The Illuminati, a secret society formed on 1 May
1776 by Adam Weishaupt, turns out to be a much
older organization, 30,000 years old, originating in
Atlantis. While the Illuminati embodies authoritarian forces linked to a one-world government, readers learn in one of many twists in the novel that this
is a false identification; the true Illuminati—known
only as A(A(—employs a totally different, laissezfaire (and Taoist) agenda.
The authors employ a conscious strategy of jumbling time and switching points of view with such
frequency as to disorient the reader. While these
nonlinear techniques are part of a satire on modernism in the novel, they have much deeper significance, enacting anarchy on the level of narrative.
These techniques create a certain vicariousness,
with the reader’s disorientation mirroring the initiation rites, mind-altering drugs, secret rituals, and
webs of deception that make up much of the story
line. The Illuminatus! Trilogy is heavily influenced
by the Principia Discordia (1965), a religious treatise on the worship of chaos, by Greg Hill and Kerry
Thornley (the latter a companion of Lee Harvey
Oswald during his time in the marines). H. P. Lovecraft appears in the novel as a writer murdered by
the Illuminati for revealing the existence of extraterrestrial “soul eaters” known as the lloigor.
The Plot
The plot revolves around the decision of the Illuminati to “immanentize the Eschaton”—to annihilate
the world in order to release enough consciousness
energy to give Illuminati members transcendental
illumination or immortality and to placate the
lloigors. The Illuminati stage three attempts at mass
destruction: a nuclear world war over the island of
Fernando Poo, the release of a plague known as
Anthrax Leprosy Pi, and the resurrection of Hitler’s
lost legion placed under a biomystical protective
field under Lake Totenkopf in Ingolstadt, Bavaria.
The story begins with a New York City bombing
in the office of a small, left-wing magazine Confrontation and the disappearance of its coeditor
340

Joseph Malik, who had been researching the Illuminati. Saul Goodman, investigating the case, is
captured by the Illuminati but rescued by Malik,
who turns out to be working with John Dillinger
and characters Simon Moon, Padre Pederastia, and
Miss Mao for the Justified Ancients of Mummu
(JAMs), a discordian group fighting the Illuminati.
Joining the JAMs in opposition to the Illuminati,
Goodman—as part of his enlightenment—learns to
perceive fnords, words people are brainwashed not
to see, which are inserted in texts to manipulate
negative responses.
Meanwhile, George Dorn, a journalist for Confrontation, who is investigating a right-wing assassination ring, is imprisoned in Mad Dog, Texas, where
he meets Harry Coin, one of several candidates for
the assassination of John F. Kennedy (the real assassin, it turns out, is Harold Canvera, an obscure individual with apolitical motives). Dorn is rescued by
members of the Legion of Dynamic Discord
(LDD), another anarchic organization fighting the
Illuminati. Hagbard Celine, a charismatic billionaire, heads the LDD; Celine, however, turns out to
be one of five leaders of the Illuminati, as well as a
member of A(A(. Joining the LDD, Dorn visits the
ruins of Atlantis, travels the underground Sea of
Valusia, meets Howard the talking dolphin, and
makes love to two women (Mavis and Stella Maris)
who turn out to be versions of the same woman—
Marilyn Monroe, who has reached transcendental
illumination and can incarnate Eris, the goddess of
discord.
The novel moves toward a very literal climax since
Eris incarnates herself through the energy released
in an explosive mass of orgasms during Woodstock
Europa, a rock concert held 1 May 1976. In an apocalyptic parody, the goddess of discord, with assistance from porpoises and many of the major characters in the story, thwarts the Illuminati’s resurrection
of Hitler’s lost legion. Meanwhile, in the Lehman
Caves outside Las Vegas, Saul Goodman contains
the threat from Anthrax Leprosy Pi, when he finds
Carmel, a pimp who is the most important man in
the world since he’s the only carrier of the disease.
Near the close of the novel, readers encounter the
Leviathan, an enormous single-celled sea creature

Income Tax and the Internal Revenue Service

(the true pyramid with the eye) who communicates
telepathically with FUCKUP, Celine’s computer.
Thus, starting out as a detective story, the novel
becomes science fiction, and finally a love story
between a super computer and a sea monster.
Conspiracies in the Novel
The novel refers to many of the major conspiracy
theories circulating in post-Watergate America, and
it depicts many militant left-wing organizations of
the 1960s. The novel also invents conspiracy theories of its own, such as the Washington-Weishaupt
theory, in which Adam Weishaupt replaces George
Washington on the eve of the formation of the
United States.
Summing up their novel, the authors state, “This
book, being part of the only serious conspiracy it
describes—that is, part of Operation Mindfuck—
has programmed the reader in ways that he or she
will not understand for a period of months (or perhaps years).” In other words, the reading is not just
a description of conspiracy—it is a conspiracy.
Operation Mindfuck in the novel is anarchic, a discordian strategy. So how, without contradiction, can
these authors program readers to be anarchists?
The answer lies in the form of programming, whose
goal, like that of a computer virus, is to disrupt a system. Politically speaking, disruption is revolution
when the objective is to overthrow a form of government or way of life. In this way the effect of
reading the novel compares with a political act
involving the subversion of cherished norms in the
West—logical consistency, the sequence of time,
the social order, and, of course, objective “reality.”
Marcus LiBrizzi
See also: Illuminati.
References
Hill, Greg, and Kerry Thornley [Malaclypse the
Younger and Omar Khayyam Ravenhurst, pseud.].
1965. Principia Discordia, or, How I Found the
Goddess and What I Did to Her When I Found
Her. Mason, MI: Loompanics Unlimited.
Prince, Robert M., ed. 1996. The Necronomicon:
Selected Stories and Essays Concerning the
Blasphemous Tome of the Mad Arab. Cthulhu
Mythos Fiction Series. Oakland, CA: Chaosium
Press.

Shea, Robert, and Robert Anton Wilson. 1975. The
Illuminatus! Trilogy. New York: Dell.

Income Tax and the Internal Revenue Service
Americans have always hated taxes, and although the
British less so, there has nevertheless in both countries been a strong resistance to government taxation, combined with demands that any duties be
carefully monitored and controlled. Taxation, of
course, lay at the root of the American Revolution,
and some “neo-Confederates” still maintain that the
tariff, not slavery, was the cause of the Civil War. No
tax, however, has been more controversial or provided more fodder for conspiracy theories than the
United States Federal Income Tax.
Employed briefly during the Civil War, then
eliminated, the income tax made a resurgence in
the late 1800s under Populist and other “reform”
groups who feared wide disparities in wealth.
Henry George’s Progress and Poverty (1879)
argued for a “single tax,” and although that was
more of a “land tax,” George’s proposal raised the
argument that everyone should pay some taxes. In
1894, Congress passed a 2 percent tax on all
incomes over $4,000, injecting “class envy” into the
taxation process. The United States Supreme
Court ruled all income tax unconstitutional the following year, but that hardly dimmed the Progressive fervor for “reform” of the wealth structure. At
the same time, discontent with tariffs—the country’s major source of revenue, replacing land sales
in the late 1800s—rose to such a degree that Congress revisited the notion of income taxes. Tariffs
had always been problematic, as they pitted one
section of the country against another, but the
income tax offered, in theory, a way to make all
“equally” bear their share of the nation’s financial
necessities.
From the outset, the income tax was “sold” to the
public and legislators on the grounds that it would
“equalize” the tax burdens borne by the various
classes. Indeed, the merits of the tax never involved
funding the nation’s activities, but advocates always
placed it in the context of egalitarianism and redistribution of wealth. Supporters discovered two cen341

Income Tax and the Internal Revenue Service

People filling out tax forms in Internal Revenue office. (Library of Congress)

tral tactics that made the tax even more popular:
keep it small (at first) and simple (at first).
However, enacting any income tax required a constitutional amendment, and the Sixteenth Amendment was ratified in 1913 to enable Congress to tax
incomes. Early proposals were aimed mainly at “the
rich,” with anyone earning less than $3,000 exempt,
and those earning $20,000 to $50,000 paying only 2
percent. The “superrich” (i.e., those with incomes
over $500,000) paid only 7 percent, and most Americans, with incomes between $3,000 and $20,000,
paid between 0.5 and 1 percent. Moreover, the
entire tax form consisted of a single page. The combination of placing the burden on the “rich” and
keeping the form simple dramatically reduced (but
did not eliminate) opposition to the tax.
Following passage of the Sixteenth Amendment
to the Constitution in 1913 as a means to escape
the constitutional prohibition on income taxes
(which the United States Supreme Court had upheld in 1894), the United States enacted the first
342

permanent, nationwide income tax. At that time,
Congress established the Bureau of Internal Revenue then, in 1953 following a federal reorganization, it became the Internal Revenue Service
(IRS).
Many continued to resist, though, claiming the
tax was unconstitutional. The most famous “tax protestor” is perhaps Irwin Schiff, whose book, How
Anyone Can Stop Paying Income Taxes (1982),
became a bestseller. Schiff claimed that no one was
required by law to sign tax forms, thus no one ever
had to pay taxes. In 1983, the federal government
changed the language of the code to address Schiff’s
claims, although none were ever upheld in court.
Schiff also claimed that people could “refuse” to be
audited by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
The federal income tax grew quite onerous in
World War I, with rates surging to 25 percemt on
the lowest tier of payers and 77 percent on the
“superrich.” Not surprisingly, tax revenues fell, and
when he became secretary of the treasury, Andrew

Income Tax and the Internal Revenue Service

Mellon decided to find out why, investigating the
relationship between rates and revenue. Even
though it would not be named the “Laffer Curve”
for another fifty years, Mellon discovered the
essence of the axiom that at some point lowering
taxes actually produces more revenue. He convinced President Warren Harding and Congress to
slash tax rates, setting off a boom known as the
Roaring Twenties that only ended with the stock
market crash in 1929.
Conspiracy theories associated with the income
tax include the position that the Sixteenth Amendment was never actually ratified; that taxation is a
“front” for support of an international monetary
fund in the form of billions of dollars of loans to
world banks; and that wages and salaries are the
chief source of income for most people, but that it
is “not income.”
The IRS, despite several congressional reforms,
is still viewed as a font of abuse, partly due to the
structure of laws under which it operates. Among
some of the abuses documented in Michael Minns’s
book, How to Survive the IRS: My Battles against
Goliath (2001), were:
1. The IRS destroyed legitimate businesses by
circulating word during its “investigation”
that the company was involved in criminal
activity.
2. Proceedings against people who have no
money, or ability to pay, as mere “test cases”
to send “messages” to “bigger fish.”
3. Tax preparers sent to jail for forms they had
not prepared or even seen.
4. Arbitrary and political uses of the audit function to silence critics of an administration, or
to intimidate proponents of IRS reform.
Worse, the IRS “never had to say it was
sorry,” in that it was virtually immune from
civil suits for wrongful prosecution, nonpayment, or seizure of property.
In addition to these abuses, the IRS conducts its
legal proceedings in “tax court,” which lacks most of
the protections of civil or criminal trials, making it
easier for the IRS to gain a conviction.

Abuses such as these led to the reforms of 1998,
which had been based on congressional hearings in
which dozens of citizens told horror stories about
bankruptcy brought on by wrongful IRS actions, or
wrongful incarceration for “nonpayment” of taxes.
The hearings had to provide anonymity to several
witnesses from the IRS out of fear that they would
be intimidated or punished at work. Nevertheless,
the truth came out, and Congress responded, if not
enthusiastically.
The resulting reforms, known as the “taxpayers’
Bill of Rights” or the IRS Restructuring Act, (1)
curbed the IRS’s ability to invoke liens, levies, and
seizures of property or income during litigation or
investigation, (2) limited the IRS’s ability to attach
wages or seize property of a spouse, and (3) allowed
civil damages against the IRS for negligence in collections or unlawful collections. In addition, the
reform provided stronger powers to the citizens’
ombudsman office, strengthened the legal position
of individuals locked in battles with the IRS, and in a
general sense opened some window of liability to the
IRS for abuses against individuals and businesses.
Another area of controversy surrounding the collection of income taxes arose during Prohibition,
when “revenooers” sought to close down “speakeasies” on the grounds that they were avoiding
taxes. Soon, IRS agents became involved in other
Treasury Department activities, such as gun control
and tobacco oversight, through the connection to
taxation. As is well known, Chicago gangster Al
Capone, who was doubtless guilty of multiple murders and general mayhem, was finally arrested and
jailed on income tax evasion.
Another element related to IRS conspiracy theories involves the attacks by the agency on tax-exempt
churches. During the Clinton administration at least
eight churches were targeted for proceedings because they allegedly broke federal tax law. However,
most of the churches punished were critical of Clinton, while no audits were conducted of so-called
“black” churches that routinely invited Clinton to
services for what were, essentially, campaign talks.
But perhaps the largest and most publicized IRS/
church battle involved the Church of Scientology,
which won tax-exempt status in 1993 after twenty343

Industrial Workers of the World

five years of “war” between the Church and the IRS.
As part of the agreement, the Church had to pay
$12.5 million to the IRS.
This marked a victory of sorts against government, but only by an organization whose power is
likewise feared by many conspiracy theorists. The
Church of Scientology, founded by L. Ron Hubbard, had employed an aggressive campaign of
suing the IRS and individual agents for millions,
repeating a formula the Church had used against
critics who claimed it was a “cult.” Perhaps of interest also was the timing of the end of the suit against
the IRS, not long after Bill Clinton took office,
thanks in large part to the support of Hollywood
elites such as John Travolta, many of whom are Scientologists.
More recent troubling aspects about the IRS and
the income tax for the conspiracy-minded include
claims that a massive abuse of the IRS by the Clinton
administration occurred in which the IRS audited
more than two dozen conservative organizations during Clinton’s second term. Not only were organizations audited, but numerous individuals who became
prominent critics of Clinton, including Paula Jones,
Billy Dale, Texe Marrs, David Horowitz, George
Putnam, and Linda Tripp, as well as women who had
gone public with their affairs with Bill Clinton, such
as Elizabeth Ward Gracen. In May 1997, Landmark
Legal Foundation began legal proceedings to obtain
documents from the IRS to determine if the audits
had been politically motivated. After much legal
wrangling, two years later Landmark found evidence
that the IRS had indeed audited the Western Journalism Center (a group critical of Clinton) after the
Clinton White House forwarded a “complaint” about
WJC. The WJC audit was only one of many brought
against magazines and journalists (including The
American Spectator and WorldNetDaily.Com editor
Joseph Farah).
One could take conspiracies involving the
income tax and the IRS in virtually any direction,
from its role as a conduit for funding “one-world
government” to its “illegal” status. The wonder
about income tax theories is not that there are so
many, but that there aren’t even more.
Larry Schweikart

344

See also: Militias.
References
Beito, David T. 1989. Taxpayers in Revolt: Tax
Resistance during the Great Depression. Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Brownlee, W. Elliot. 1996. Federal Taxation in
America: A Short History. Washington, DC:
Woodrow Wilson Center Press.
“Downside Legacy at Two Degrees of President
Clinton, Section: IRS Audits and Tax Exempt
Status,” by Alamo-Girl. http://www.freerepublic.
com/forum/a37fd23f3657d.htm.
Schiff, Irwin. 1982. How Anyone Can Stop Paying
Income Taxes. Hamden, CT: Freedom Books.
Websites
Scientology Audited: http://www.demon.co.uk/
castle/audit/index.html.
Treasury Tax Secrets: http://www.treasurytaxsecrets.
com.

Industrial Workers of the World
In the history of U.S. labor, the Industrial Workers of
the World (IWW or Wobblies) has no equal in its
revolutionary spirit, its vibrant proletarian and egalitarian culture, and its commitment to fighting the
class struggle. Between its founding by working-class
militants in 1905 and its mass persecution after
World War I, the IWW engaged in hundreds of
spectacular strikes from the timberlands of the
Pacific Northwest to the textile mills of New England. For over a decade, the IWW was the most
feared labor union in the country, making it the target of an extraordinary level of repression from
Pinkertons, vigilantes, police, and militias, or what
the Wobblies simply called the “Iron Heel.” “There
can be no peace,” states the IWW’s founding document, “so long as hunger and want are found among
millions of working people and the few, who make
up the employing class, have all the good things of
life” (Kornbluh). Attacked by employers, demonized
by political leaders, and depicted in the capitalist
press as bomb-throwing and un-American aliens, the
IWW may have been the most conspired against and
conspiratorially minded U.S. social movement of the
early twentieth century.
There are many reasons why the U.S. ruling
classes saw the IWW as such a threat. Broadly syndi-

Industrial Workers of the World

As a leader of organized labor and a presidential
candidate for the Socialist Party in five elections, Eugene
V. Debs passionately fought for radical social change in
the United States. (Library of Congress)

calist and socialist in ideology, the IWW was dedicated to building “One Big Union” of all working
people who would use the revolutionary “General
Strike” to overthrow capitalism and abolish the wage
system. The IWW built its membership out of workers that most unions believed were unorganizable,
including itinerant workers, tramps and hoboes, lumberjacks, miners, harvest workers, and factory
women. Unique among U.S. unions at the time, the
IWW proudly organized men, women, and even

children of every race, nation, and language without
prejudice. The IWW imagined itself as the “fighting
organization of the working class,” and resolutely
refused to build permanent union structures that
could become coopted or bureaucratic and thereby
lose its revolutionary spirit. Instead, the Wobblies
offered their organizational talents during strikes and
taught workers how to organize, make demands, and
win concessions for themselves. The Wobblies wrote
songs and poems of agitation, including the labor
classic “Solidarity Forever.” Their many newspapers
were filled with political cartoons and published in
dozens of languages. IWW printing houses were
famous for producing inflammatory pamphlets on
sabotage and revolutionary strategy, as well as thousands of stickers and buttons known as “silent agitators” emblazoned with slogans like “Joint the IWW
and Fire Your Boss,” “Labor Is Entitled to All it Creates,” “An Injury to One Is an Injury to All,” and
“Bum Work for Bum Pay.” The Wobblies also produced some of the most charismatic and committed
leaders in the history of the U.S. Left, including the
giant, one-eyed William “Big Bill” Haywood, the
“Rebel Girl” Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, Carlo Tresca,
Eugene V. Debs, and Ralph Chaplin. In short, the
IWW inculcated the fiercest radicalism in sectors of
the industrial working class that were once the most
exploited and degraded in the country, thereby posing a direct threat to the profits of some of the country’s richest and most corrupt corporations.
Choosing to make its stand exclusively on the economic front, the IWW generally saw elections as
futile and political institutions as coconspirators with
capitalism. Wobbly leader Elizabeth Gurley Flynn
argued that the state was simply “the slugging committee of the ruling class” and not a real democracy
(Dubofsky). “No Socialist can be a law abiding citizen,” proclaimed “Big Bill” Haywood, commenting
on the capitalist nature of the United States; “when
we come together and are of a common mind, and
the purpose of our minds is to overthrow the capitalist system, we become conspirators then against the
United States government” (Preston). Though Haywood was being critical of the biases of state power
with this statement, most political and industrial
elites did see the IWW as a subversive “conspiracy”
345

Industrial Workers of the World

that was out to undermine property, decency, and
law and order.
Where the government, business, and press used
violence to eradicate the Wobbly “conspiracy,” the
IWW defended itself with accusations of a “frameup,” sparking an ongoing rhetorical, legal, and political class struggle over the meaning of “conspiracy.”
Committed to nonviolent direct-action protest,
Wobbly civil-disobedience often generated violence
in return. During major strikes and confrontations,
Wobbly leaders were repeatedly arrested and
charged with the crime of “conspiracy.” The first
major trial began in 1906 when Big Bill Haywood
and two others leaders of the Western Federation
of Miners (WFM) were tried in Idaho for conspiracy in the murder of the former governor. Under
the direction of infamous Pinkerton James McParlain, Big Bill and his comrades were kidnapped in
Colorado and illegally extradited to Idaho to stand
trial for their lives. A massive publicity campaign
eventually “broke the conspiracy” and Haywood
was acquitted. During the IWW’s “free-speech
campaigns” in Spokane, Fresno, San Diego, and
elsewhere, Wobbly activists were met with mass
arrests, police brutality, and vigilante violence to
prevent their constitutional right to hold open-air
meetings. During the Lawrence, Massachusetts,
“Bread and Roses” strike of 1912, textile mill owners were put on trial for planting a bomb that they
intended to blame on the IWW. In 1915, Wobbly
songwriter Joe Hill was executed in Utah in what
many believe was a conspiracy to frame a poetic
voice of proletarian revolution. More so than any
other union in the United States, Wobbly history is
full of such examples.
When the United States began to “prepare” for
its entry into World War I, the repression of the
IWW intensified. Teddy Roosevelt attacked the
IWW as disloyal and pro-German, claiming that
“every district where the IWW starts rioting should
be placed under martial law and cleaned up by military methods” (Dubofsky). Congressmen and business leaders denounced the IWW as “Imperial
William’s Warriors” or the “I Won’t Work” and
passed new antisedition laws to quash dissent during wartime. Although the IWW membership was
346

split over support for the war, its newspapers and
magazines were banned from the mail and hundreds of Wobblies were persecuted for leading
strikes, making speeches, or carrying membership
cards. Frank Little, a militant Wobbly leader and
opponent of U.S. involvement in World War I, was
lynched during a strike in Butte, Montana, by a
gang of masked vigilantes who were most likely
hired by the copper-mine owners.
Beginning in 1917, the Justice Department unleashed its newly constituted federal police powers
against the national leadership of the IWW, leading
to the arrests of over 2,000 Wobblies on charges of
conspiring to obstruct the war effort. Most were
convicted of violating wartime antisedition laws
(well after the war was over), and sentenced to long
prison terms. Many years later, one of the indicted
Wobbly leaders from Chicago had this to say about
the trial: “After we had heard the case for the prosecution we became certain that a real charge of
conspiracy had been proven—but not against us.
We were sure that the real conspirators were the
ones who were trying the alleged conspirators. The
government itself had planned the conspiracy, and
we were its victims” (Brazier).
During the postwar red scare, one incident in
particular marked the violent end of the IWW. On
Armistice Day 1919, in the lumber town of Centralia, Washington, several community leaders and
members of the American Legion carried out a
bloody attack on the local IWW hall. Determined to
defend themselves against the mob’s assault, the
Wobblies engaged the Legionnaires in a fierce gun
battle that left several men on both sides dead. One
Wobbly, Wesley Everest, who was captured in his
World War I soldier’s uniform, was later dragged
from his prison cell under cover of night and
lynched by a mob. This event is widely known in
Wobbly literature as the “Centralia Conspiracy.”
Michael Cohen
See also: The Iron Heel.
References
Brazier, Richard. 1966. “The Mass I.W.W. Trial of
1918: A Retrospect.” Labor History 7: 178–192.
Chaplin, Ralph. 1920. The Centralia Conspiracy.
Chicago, IL: General Defense Committee.

Internet

Dubofsky, Melvyn. 1969. We Shall Be All: A History
of the IWW. New York: Quadrangle.
Foner, Philip S. 1965. The Industrial Workers of the
World, 1905–1917: History of the Labor
Movement in the United States. Vol. 4. New York:
International Publishers.
Kornbluh, Joyce L. 1988. Rebel Voices: An IWW
Anthology. Chicago, IL: Charles H. Kerr
Publishing Co.
Preston, William, Jr. 1994. Aliens and Dissenters:
Federal Suppression of Radicals, 1903–1933.
Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
Renshaw, Patrick. 1967. The Wobblies: The Story of
the IWW and Syndicalism in the United States.
Chicago, IL: Ivan R. Dee.

Internet
The Internet and conspiracy theories are a match
made in heaven. With its ability to link seemingly
unrelated information, the Internet has become the
new home for amateur and professional conspiracy
theorists, who spread their messages by the millions
through all channels and networks. Having itself
emerged from underneath a shroud of secrecy, the
Internet has not only revolutionized the ways in
which we communicate, it has also transformed the
nature of conspiracy culture.
Historical Origins of the Internet
The Internet itself began amidst a quasi-conspiracy.
Its origin lay in the paranoia and fear that was widespread in the late 1950s in the United States because
the Soviet Union had gained a lead in the space race,
having launched several of its Sputnik satellites. To
overcome this technological lag, the U.S. government began investing large sums of money in military technology—the beginnings of the military
industrial complex.
One immediate result was the founding of the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA), a branch of the U.S. Defense Department, in 1958. This agency had the task of creating
and sustaining U.S. technological supremacy in the
field of military applications throughout the world.
Part of this task was developing a communication
network that could withstand severe attacks and
resulting outages by means of the dynamic rerout-

ing of messages. Somewhat by chance, a research
team at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT) simultaneously began working with the idea
of connecting two computers over a vast geographical space, thus creating a network.
By the mid-1960s these initial tests had come to
fruition and when DARPA hired MIT researcher
Lawrence Roberts in 1966, the Internet—or
“ARPAnet” as it was then called—was born. Initially,
this project remained a secret feasibility study under
the auspices of the U.S. Department of State. But its
rapid growth among universities and research institutions with defense contracts made keeping it
undercover unfeasible. In 1972 it was made public
at an international computer conference.
Throughout the 1970s and early 1980s ARPAnet
remained largely in the public domain, but access to
these super computer networks was restricted to
institutions of higher education and research. In the
mid-1980s, however, this changed. The National Science Foundation (NSF) created the NSFnet to link
five supercomputer centers, and this, coupled with
the implementation of a new set of communication
protocols called TCP/IP (Transmission Control Program/Internet Protocol), soon supplanted the
ARPAnet as the backbone of the Internet. In 1995,
however, the NSF decommissioned the NSFnet and
responsibility for the Internet was assumed by the
private sector. Fueled by the increasing popularity of
personal computers and the World Wide Web,
which was introduced in 1991, the Internet saw
explosive growth beginning in 1993, thereafter
becoming a significant factor in the stock market and
commerce during the second half of the decade. But
why has the Internet become a haven for conspiracy
theorists and their kin and how has this medium
changed conspiracy culture in the process?
Connections between Conspiracy
Theory and the Internet
With the advent of the Internet as a commercially
successful medium in the mid-1990s, conspiracy
theories immediately found a new home. For those
who could afford it, the Internet offered the possibility of exchanging information of any kind at
speeds and in quantities hitherto unimaginable.
347

Internet

New modes of correspondence that greatly facilitate communication across temporal and spatial
barriers have emerged in cyberspace: e-mail, mailing lists, newsgroups, Internet relay chat, electronic
conferencing, and multi-user dimensions (MUDs).
Often relegated to the political and social fringes
and often ridiculed or debunked by the mainstream
conservative press, conspiracy theorists now discovered that the Net was a perfect vehicle to transport
and spread their thoughts.
Besides the speed and the quantity of information
being exchanged, the novelty is that the information
is to a great extent uncensored. The Internet does
not discriminate between truth and fiction, and
completely ludicrous information is placed alongside scientific contributions. The possibility for an
Internet user to remain anonymous is similarly important in this respect, since it allows for completely
depersonalized information exchange, where no
moral justification or fear of being reproached for
what is written is needed. The Internet thus has
become a new virtual reality where the lines
between factual truths and utter lies have become
completely blurred. It is precisely this space where
conspiracy theorists found fertile ground for their
beliefs and interpretations.
One of the outstanding features of conspiracy
theories is their ability to connect seemingly disparate events, groups, or individuals into a grand
scheme or plot. In a similar fashion the Internet
enables associations through so-called links, which
are hypertext connections between two pieces of
information or data. One website may have as many
as several hundred links to other websites. The
name itself—web—is no coincidence. A second significant correlation between the Internet and conspiracy theories is the ability of online search
engines to combine any number of words and to
display the results accordingly. Thus the conspiracy
theorists’ inclination to combine disparate events,
people, and places can infinitely and instantly be
satisfied. Jonathan Vankin and John Whalen,
authors of 70 Greatest Conspiracy Theories of All
Time and creators of the conspire.com website,
note: “If ever there was a mass medium that mirrored the psychotropic device of the conspiracy the348

ory, the World Wide Web is it. With its vertiginous
array of endless connections—hyperlinks for the
hyperattuned—the Web fits the paranoid mindset
as snugly as a virus locks into a human receptor cell”
(qtd. in Pence). Likewise it has been suggested that
the Internet was not just made for conspiracy theory: “it is a conspiracy theory” (Stewart qtd. in Marcus, 18). A final reason why the Internet is a haven
for conspiracy-minded people is that it gives individuals the option to remain anonymous, hidden, or
unknown. This, of course, is paramount for the conspiracy theorist prototype since his activities in disclosing secret evils must themselves always remain
clandestine in order to succeed. The possibility to
produce conspiratorial interpretations while one’s
identity—including name, age, gender, religion,
political affiliation, occupation, marital status,
etc.—remains concealed thus is an essential reason
why the Internet has become a catalyst for the creation of conspiracy theories. This anonymity promotes in the user a readiness to experiment and a
willingness to go beyond the barriers of common
sense and logical cognition. It is these reasons that
lead us to understand why the conspiracy culture
has undergone and continues to undergo a significant paradigmatic shift.
The Internet has made conspiracy theories and
the people who hatch them ubiquitous, socially
acceptable, and in some cases even legendary. The
World Wide Web has become a venue where people
can express and share their fears about politics, the
government, space invaders, secret organizations
and the like, while coming to terms with their daily
lives. In a world where the Federal Bureau of Investigation monitors e-mails and phone calls with a software called “DSC1000” (formerly “Carnivore”), the
National Security Agency spies on foreign countries’
economic activity using a secret program called
“Echelon,” and NASA—in a post–September 11
paranoia of its own—just offered a well-known airline company the use of a machine that can read the
minds of passengers before they board a plane, these
individual fears are certainly more than warranted.
The Internet has become an arena for a new form of
political discourse, one that is unmediated, liberalizing, almost anarchic. An abundance of cyber-

Iran-Contra

communities has sprung up that discusses, shares,
and interprets information on a constant basis. Conspiracy newsgroups are some of the most highly visited forums on the Net.
This new form of communication also connects
many people that previously had no possibility of
corresponding even though they shared a broad
interest in a certain topic. It is this almost ritual sharing of information in the online forums by a regular
group of participants that constitutes an online community. These individuals are not necessarily
detached from the real world, as some skeptics fear.
Rather, they might be seen as trying to come to
terms with real-world events in a venue that connects like-minded persons who are well aware that
their community is based in a textual world. Because
participants come and go as they please and major
topics of interest change frequently, the community
can be described as amorphous and possibly
ephemeral since these newsgroup communities
undergo a process of continuous membership evolution. For some social theorists, then, these forms of
communication and community promise to open
new opportunities of social and political interaction
and in turn possibly create a new form of participatory democracy hitherto unknown.
Conspiracy theories, in most cases, are interpretations of real events. They can thus be understood
as versions—multiple and multiplying accounts—of
reality. Cyberspace, too, has been described as a
version of reality: virtual reality. It is precisely this
notion of another reality behind or beyond reality
that constitutes the fundamental temptation of
cyberspace and conspiracy theories. This is why
there is no doubting that the Internet has propelled
the spread of conspiracy theories to an extent we
can scarcely grasp, and many have lamented this
tendency. It is the weblike structure of the Internet
itself that makes it beneficial for interpretations of
every shape, size, and ideological orientation. The
theories are free to roam, grow, mutate, spread, and
also disappear in this virtual realm.
Some commentators, however, have expressed
the hope that where conspiracy theory meets the
Internet there will arise a new and more benign
understanding of these interpretative methods. If

such theories are understood as the outcries of
those who feel left out politically, socially, or otherwise on the one hand and, on the other, as the
upholding of a liberal individualism some people
fear they are losing, then the Internet could be seen
to serve as an instrument of democracy and as a
voice of representation for those who previously
had none.
David P. Weimann
See also: Hackers.
References
Abbate, Janet. 1999. Inventing the Internet.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hafner, Katie, and Matthew Lyon. 1996. Where
Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins of the
Internet. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Pence, Angélica. 1998. “The Truth Is Not Out
There: Ex-Jounalists Capitalize on Paranoia.”
StarNet Dispatches, 24 July.
Stewart, Kathleen. 1999. “Conspiracy Theory’s
Worlds.” In Paranoia within Reason, ed. George
Marcus. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Iran-Contra
Iran-Contra linked together two issues on opposite
sides of the world that dominated President Ronald
Reagan’s foreign policy. In the Middle East, he was
deeply concerned about U.S. hostages, including the
CIA’s Beirut station chief, William Buckley, being
held in Lebanon by Hezbollah, a fundamentalist
group with links to Iran. His aim in Central America, meanwhile, was to prevent the spread of communism, particularly by supporting the Contra
rebels fighting the leftist government in Nicaragua.
The CIA and members of the National Security
Council (NSC) staff secretly pursued these ends by
effectively trading arms for hostages with Iran
despite “Operation Staunch,” the administration’s
arms embargo against the radical Islamic regime.
Simultaneously, they also organized private and foreign financing for the Contras as well as public relations campaigns within the United States. Reagan
certainly approved much of this, but it remains
unclear whether he authorized a diversion of funds
from the Iranian arms sales to the Contras.
349

Iran-Contra

At the time of the affair, some observers (e.g.,
Draper) argued that it almost amounted to a coup
with a small “junta” led by Reagan and including
Admiral John Poindexter, the national security
adviser, Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North, an NSC
staffer, and William Casey, the head of the CIA,
secretly running a foreign policy against the express
wishes of Congress. However, a less apocalyptic
view was subsequently established, which blamed
the affair on the net result of the imperial expansion
of the presidency, Reagan’s poor management, and
his weak knowledge of foreign affairs (Draper; Cannon). His senior cabinet members, particularly the
secretary of state, George Shultz, and the secretary
of defense, Casper Weinberger, were also accused of
not properly controlling policy implementation
within the administration. However, after congressional hearings ended in 1988 the affair quickly
faded from the public consciousness. It was not a
major issue in the 1988 presidential election, despite
Vice-President George Bush’s involvement, and
aside from a few storms linked to the special prosecutor’s investigation it rarely hit the news after Reagan’s term ended.
Historical Background
After the pro-U.S. Shah of Iran was overthrown in
1979, staff at the U.S. Embassy in Tehran were held
hostage for over a year by the new regime of Ayatollah Khomeini. According to some commentators
and historians, the crisis greatly helped Ronald
Reagan beat Jimmy Carter in the 1980 presidential
election, and it also made him determined to secure
the release of the U.S. hostages held in Beirut as the
issue threatened his reelection. Others in his administration, including William Casey, Robert
McFarlane, the national security adviser at the
time, and Admiral Poindexter (then McFarlane’s
deputy), also hoped to return Iran to its traditional
role as a counterweight to Soviet influence in the
Middle East. Despite Iranian involvement in terrorist acts against the “Great Satan,” culminating in
the 1983 bombing of a U.S. Marine base in
Lebanon that resulted in 241 deaths, they believed
that there were moderates within Khomeini’s
regime who would be willing to help U.S. cold war
350

realpolitik. The two issues combined in Iran-Contra
as weapons sales were meant to promote moderates
who would then secure the release of the Beirut
hostages.
Reagan’s Central American policies were similarly affected by the cold war as Communists had
taken power in both Grenada and Nicaragua in
1979. Reagan reacted in 1981 by authorizing CIA
involvement against the Sandanistas in Nicaragua,
and the opposition Contras were soon built up to
5,000 men from nearly nothing. In 1982, though,
Congress reacted to Reagan’s strident policies by
passing the Boland Amendment, prohibiting the
funding of attempts to overthrow the Sandanistas.
The CIA continued to fund the Contras, however,
saying it was fighting the arms flow into neighboring El Salvador, and in 1984 Reagan went further
by authorizing the mining of Nicaraguan harbors.
Congress angrily reacted to this clear violation of
international law by passing the second Boland
Amendment in June 1984, banning all direct CIA
intervention.
The Contra Scandal
Following the first Boland Amendment, Oliver
North began to guide secret, privately funded public relations campaigns supporting the Contras and
opposing congressional opponents. Meanwhile,
Casey secured financial support from the apartheid
government in South Africa for the Contras before
deciding to target rich private citizens. North again
took part and Reagan, who supported the plan, also
met with big donors, including singer Pat Boone,
Texas oilman Nelson Bunker Hunt, and brewer
Joseph Coors. The campaign raised $10 to $20 million but more money came from foreign states.
Saudi Arabia gave $32 million after an approach
from McFarlane, while Taiwan, Brunei, and South
Korea also gave support.
Aside from fund-raising, the Joint Congressional
Committee looking into Iran-Contra showed that
the NSC and the CIA had also continued to provide
direct support for the Contras. A key figure was
John Hull, an Indiana-born rancher based in Costa
Rica, who later skipped bail to avoid charges of
drug and arms trafficking. He was also indicted on

Iran-Contra

charges related to the bombing of a press conference, attended by U.S. journalists, which caused
eight deaths. The CIA’s involvement was revealed in
October 1986 when one of its planes was shot
down, but North and Poindexter argued before the
Congressional Committee that it didn’t break the
Boland Amendments. They differentiated between
funds appropriated by Congress and unappropriated funds and said that the executive branch only
needed to account to Congress for the former. This
distinction represented a threat to constitutional
government, however, as it cut Congress out of any
role in foreign policy (Draper 1991).
The Iranian Scandal
Another source of funding for the Contras was a
diversion of profits from illegal arms sales to the
Iranian government. McFarlane, following an
approach by the director general of the Israeli Foreign Ministry, David Kimche, had started these sales
in July 1985. Kimche said that via Manucher Ghorbanifar, an exiled Iranian merchant, he had contacted Iranian moderates who wanted to establish
better relations with the United States. To show
their seriousness, they would secure the release of
Buckley in return for the United States authorizing
a small arms sale to Iran for use in its war against
Iraq. McFarlane discussed the idea with Reagan and
the chief of staff, Don Regan, on 18 July while the
president was in the hospital following surgery. It
clearly breached the U.S. arms embargo, but Reagan approved the plan as it offered the possibility of
contacting moderates and releasing the hostages.
On 6 August, McFarlane presented a deal worked
out by Ghorbanifar to Reagan, Bush, George Shultz,
and Casper Weinberger. Shultz and Weinberger
opposed the plan, which involved 100 TOW missiles
being exchanged for a number of releases, but Reagan was noncommittal. McFarlane later claimed
that the president subsequently approved it and
Reagan confirmed this to the Tower Board, which
he established to investigate the affair. However, the
president later told the board that he hadn’t
approved it, before finally saying that he couldn’t
remember. The board and Congress both eventually
concluded that Reagan had approved the plan.

On 20 August, Israel shipped 96 missiles to Iran,
which the United States replaced, but no hostages
were released. Yet when the Iranians asked for 400
more missiles Reagan quickly agreed, so Israel
shipped 408 more missiles to Iran on 14 September
with the United States again replacing them. The
following day a U.S. hostage, the Reverend Benjamin Weir, was released in Beirut. However, as this
didn’t meet the terms of the original deal, the Iranians’ next order was met with some skepticism.
For instance, Michael Ledeen, a pro-Israeli historian who had acted as a conduit with Israel, argued
that the plan should be abandoned, but McFarlane
carried on and dropped Ledeen in favor of Oliver
North. More Israeli missiles were soon on the way
to Portugal en route to Iran, but despite lying to the
State Department, North couldn’t get Portuguese
approval so the flight was turned back. Instead, a
CIA front airline made a delivery, but the Iranians
were subsequently refunded $8 million of their $11
million payment as the missiles they received
couldn’t hit high-flying reconnaissance planes.
Another $1 million was diverted by North into “The
Enterprise,” a web of secret bank accounts run by
ex-U.S. Air Force major general Richard Secord,
which funneled funds to the Contras.
On 5 December, Reagan signed a “finding” retrospectively authorizing all that the CIA had done
and ordering Casey not to brief Congress about the
operation. Poindexter, the new national security
adviser (McFarlane had resigned on 2 December),
kept it in his office safe and destroyed it once the
scandal became public, as it explicitly described the
affair as an arms trade for hostages. This would have
greatly embarrassed Reagan, as he always maintained that he wasn’t dealing with the kidnappers
but only with people who could influence them.
This distinction was difficult to maintain, however,
as the hostage-takers were clearly greatly influenced by Iran, their main sponsor, even if they were
not actually under its direction.
Reagan signed two more “findings” in January
1986 authorizing direct CIA arms sales to Iran,
which William Casey and North quickly acted upon.
Reagan overrode Casey’s and Weinberger’s reservations and approved the transfer of 3,504 TOWs to
351

Iran-Contra

Iran in January 1986. Weinberger had put up some
bureaucratic obstacles but Reagan’s support ensured
the plan’s implementation, although only 1,500 missiles were sent before the scandal was revealed. Secord acted as the CIA liaison with the Defense
Department and he creamed off millions of dollars
for the Contras (as well as a commission for himself)
as North was vastly overcharging the Iranians. The
new deliveries again failed to lead to hostage
releases, revealing the futility of the plan. As the
missiles were sent before releases, the kidnappers
had no incentive for releasing hostages. Indeed, the
plan really provided an incentive for kidnapping
more Americans as the U.S. government was always
willing to pay the “ransom.” But, as North argued
during the affair, if the United States had broken off
the deal, it could have incited even more hostagetaking (or worse) from the terrorists. By the end of
the affair, three Americans had been released, but
another three hostages had replaced them.
The plan eventually became public when a
Lebanese magazine revealed in November 1986
that McFarlane and North had visited Iran in May
1986 to discuss the arms deals. They had flown to
Iran using fake passports with another NSC staffer
and CIA personnel on a plane carrying Hawk missile
spares. The mission was meant to speed up hostage
releases, with more Hawks waiting to be flown out
offered as an incentive. However, the Iranians
treated the Americans badly, keeping them waiting
and only sending low-level negotiators. The two
sides also failed to agree on whether the arms should
be delivered before or after the hostage releases.
However, a compromise was eventually reached,
which meant that the United States kept up a steady
supply of sales until the scheme was revealed.
The Investigations
Once the scandal became public, Reagan appointed
an investigatory commission consisting of former
secretary of state Edmund Muskie, Ford’s national
security adviser Brett Scrowcroft, and former
Republican senator John Tower, who was the chairman. The Tower Board investigated the whole affair
and revealed many of the shortcomings of Reagan’s
lackluster control of foreign policy. It also revealed
352

Reagan’s inability to recall much about the affair,
even when presented with clear evidence of his
involvement in it.
The Tower Board carried out its investigation in
private, so it was overshadowed by the public congressional hearings even though it revealed considerably more. It was a Tower Board aide who found
hundreds of vital documents still recorded on computers, which North thought had all been destroyed.
These records provided the key to unraveling the
scandal as North and his secretary, Fawn Hall, had
had a “shredding party” to get rid of as many paper
documents as possible. Yet, much of the plan was
carried out without written records anyway. Poindexter had imposed an iron curtain of secrecy on the
plan, discouraging North from putting anything on
paper and compartmentalizing the plan so only a
very few people knew everything. He told the Congressional Committee that he had lied to Congress
and implemented the plan without approaching
Reagan as he knew what the president wanted to do.
The president thus had “plausible deniability”
against any inquiries; “the buck stops here,”
Poindexter concluded.
The congressional hearings, held from 5 May to 3
August 1987, garnered much public attention, especially the appearance of Oliver North. He created a
striking image dressed in his medal-covered marine
uniform, which he had never worn while working in
the NSC. Throughout his appearance, North argued
that he had acted as a patriot, defending the United
States from communism. He won a great deal of public support, despite admitting to a series of illegal acts
culminating in a plan to use the Iranian money to
finance a new body similar to the CIA but outside of
all constitutional restraints. He said Poindexter and
Casey shared his aim, but Casey never faced the Congressional Committee as he had a cerebral hemorrhage on the morning he was due to testify. He died
in a hospital a few months later, leaving many questions about the CIA’s role in the affair unanswered.
After the Hearings
Once the hearings were completed, the scandal all
but died. It was not a major issue during the 1988
presidential election, for instance, which Bush won

Irish Republican Army

despite suspicions about his involvement. The special
prosecutor, Lawrence Walsh, continued to investigate and successfully prosecuted North and Poindexter on a number of charges. However, both had their
convictions overturned by the court of appeals
because of the immunity they had been given for
their congressional testimony. Others, including
McFarlane, Secord, Alan Fiers of the CIA, and Elliot
Abrams, a former assistant secretary of state, pleaded
guilty to a number of minor criminal offences, generally involving lying to Congress, but no one went to
jail. Casper Weinberger was also indicted on five
felony counts in June 1992, but the president pardoned him and five others six months later.
The pardons all but ended Walsh’s investigations,
and Bush was thus accused of having acted to spare
himself embarrassing court appearances and even
prosecution. The public, though, was not really
interested as the scandal seemed to be a historical
nonevent. A number of factors contributed to this
view, but it was primarily because the scandal suffered from comparisons to Watergate. For instance,
the Joint Congressional Committee hearings were
considered to be less dramatic than the Watergate
ones as there were no revelations to match those of
John Dean. The consequences were also less dramatic, as Reagan did not have to resign as Nixon
had. It was never conclusively proven that he had
approved the diversion, and the lack of a “smoking
gun” meant he escaped impeachment. After leaving
the White House, Reagan also quickly became a historical figure, as he withdrew from politics and made
few public appearances. In 1994, he also announced
that he was suffering from Alzheimer’s disease,
which further shielded him against public investigation. (In the same year, North unsuccessfully fought
a Senate race in Virginia for the Republicans.) Bush
also received little attention once he left office, as his
single term was not seen as being historically noteworthy and the public’s appetite for scandal was
soon being satisfied by his successor, Bill Clinton.
Neil Denslow
References
Bernstein, Dennis, and Janet King. 1989. “Hostile
Acts.” The Progressive, March.

Cannon, Lou. 1991. President Reagan: Role of a
Lifetime. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Draper, Theodore. 1987. “An Autopsy.” New York
Review of Books, 17 December.
———. 1991. A Very Thin Line: The Iran-Contra
Affairs. New York: Hill and Wang.
Kornbluh, Peter, and Malcolm Byrne, eds. 1993.
The Iran-Contra Scandal: The Declassified
History. New York: New Press.
McFarlane, Robert C., and Zofi Smardz. 1994.
Special Trust. New York: Cadell and Davis.
North, Oliver L., with William Novak. 1990. Under
Fire: An American Story. New York:
HarperCollins.
Tower, John, Edmund Muskie, and Brent
Scrowcroft. 1987. The Tower Commission Report.
New York: Times Books.

Irish Republican Army
At any one time there are believed to be over 3,000
terrorist groups active in the world. Despite recent
concerns, extremely few of these groups are active in
the United States, but one group that has had a presence stretching back through recent decades is the
Irish Republican Army (IRA). Some 40 million
Americans claim Irish ancestry and when terrorism
emerged out of the political and civil unrest in
Northern Ireland in the late 1960s, there were concerns that militant republican groups like the IRA
would find among this diaspora a ready source of
funding, weapons, recruits, and political support.
Since then there have been frequently voiced concerns—particularly from paranoid U.K. governments—that the United States is the major source of
financing and weapons for the IRA’s campaigns of
violence. The media have played on such fears and a
steady stream of films and novels have portrayed
(usually with a sympathetic eye) Irish terrorists
working, fighting, and dying for the cause on the
streets of U.S. cities. But how realistic is this picture?
Certainly, there is a small degree of support
among Irish Americans for the IRA, and accompanying this support have been money and weapons.
However, the extent of this assistance has generally
been hugely overestimated. In the Irish War of
Independence fought from 1919 to 1921 more than
$10 million was raised in the United States for the
353

The Iron Heel

IRA (an impressive sum equivalent to nearly $100
million today) (Coogan). This bounty, however, contrasts starkly with the far more frugal support provided in the recent conflict. The Irish Northern Aid
Committee (NORAID) raised some $600,000 in
the United States in the first years of the 1970s, but
by the end of the decade they were struggling to
raise even $100,000 (Bishop and Mallie). Fifty years
on, it was clear that support for Irish extremism had
declined dramatically in the United States. It was a
trend that would continue. By 1998 a detailed study
into the finances of the IRA revealed that while the
organization had an annual budget in the region of
$10 million per annum, the vast majority of this sum
was being raised within Northern Ireland and the
Republic of Ireland (Horgan and Taylor). As little as
$50,000 was coming from the United States (less
than 1 percent of the IRA’s annual income).
In terms of weapons as well, the role of the United
States has generally been overstated, but at least in
the 1970s there was more genuine cause for concern
on this issue. When the recent round of troubles
kick-started in 1969 the IRA was desperately short of
weapons. With its large Irish community and lax gun
laws, the United States was the first port of call in the
search to acquire arms. In 1970 five Irish Americans
in Philadelphia organized a shipment of over 400
Armalite rifles (a weapon used for deer hunting in
the United States), which were all successfully smuggled into Ireland. But such large shipments were
rare. Most weapons from the United States were
smuggled in very small batches, hidden in suitcases
or concealed in freight goods. Like the Armalites,
most of these weapons were hunting guns or other
small-caliber items, bought legally in stores and
shows throughout the United States and smuggled
slowly overseas. There was precious little weaponry
of serious military caliber. In an attempt to address
this, IRA representatives involved themselves with
organized crime elements in efforts to acquire more
potent weaponry, such as M60 machine-guns and
later Stinger surface-to-air missile systems (Bell).
However, these isolated efforts tended to backfire
for the IRA and, even before the end of the 1970s,
the United States had largely become a peripheral
source of weaponry (although a very limited amount
354

of munitions smuggling has continued even into the
cease-fire era).
While prepared to raise funds and purchase
weapons in the United States, it has always been
very clear that the IRA has not been prepared to
commit acts of violence in the country. In theory,
they have many potential targets (e.g., the British
Embassy in New York). However, the IRA has
always understood that there would be a serious
public and political backlash if it engaged in violence
in the United States and it has strict orders in place
to absolutely prohibit that from happening. With the
declaration of cease-fires in the mid-1990s, support
for extremist republicans has dwindled even further
in the United States. The largest of the dissident
groups, the Real IRA, is now believed to bring in no
more than $10,000 to $15,000 per annum from the
United States, and sometimes even less than this.
The U.S. operations of the dissidents have also been
seriously hurt by effective undercover and surveillance operations by the FBI in particular. Indeed,
throughout both the 1980s and 1990s police and
federal agents have proven very effective in identifying and prosecuting those involved in procuring
weapons and funds for the IRA. Such losses have
hastened the decline of illicit support for the movement, especially as a more moderate Irish republicanism has emerged to the fore with the advent of
the ongoing peace process. At the start of the
twenty-first century, it is fair to say that the level of
support Irish terrorists now enjoy in the United
States is extremely meager indeed.
Andrew Silke
References
Bell, J. Bowyer. 2001. The IRA 1968–2000. London:
Frank Cass.
Bishop, Patrick, and Eamonn Mallie. 1987. The
Provisional IRA. London: Corgi.
Coogan, Tim Pat. 1987. The IRA. London: Fontana.
Horgan, John, and Max Taylor. 1998. “Playing the
Green Card—Financing the Provisional IRA: Part
1.” Terrorism and Political Violence 11: 1–38.

The Iron Heel
The Iron Heel is the title of Jack London’s 1908 novel
about a socialist revolution in the United States.

The Iron Heel

While London is best known today as a writer of
adventure stories about dogs, in his own time The
Iron Heel established London’s identity as a literary
hero of the international proletariat and the most
famous U.S. socialist around the world. The future
of totalitarian dictatorship and mass working-class
revolt imagined in London’s novel caused such a stir
among his generation of radicals that the term “Iron
Heel” came into common usage as a name for strikebreaking, police brutality, government conspiracies,
and other violent forms of labor discipline and political repression. But like most dystopian novels set in
the “not-too-distant future,” through the years The
Iron Heel has proven to be equally prophetic and
problematic.
Working class by background and a committed
socialist since boyhood, Jack London was inspired
to write The Iron Heel by the plebeian terrorism
and czarist brutality of the Russian Revolution of
1905 and the violent series of strikes that spread
class conflict across the mining and mill towns of
Colorado. In Colorado, a cabal of mine and mill
owners—working in consort with the local government—used Pinkertons, the state militia, vigilante
mobs, bombing conspiracies, and agents provocateurs, as well as the courts, police, and capitalist
press, to crush the militant Western Federation of
Miners and end their drive for the eight-hour day.
London extrapolated the real events from Cripple
Creek, Telluride, and Russia to produce a speculative novel in which a ruthless capitalist “Oligarchy”
gives birth to the repressive “Iron Heel,” a violent
counterrevolutionary army of militia, spies, and
mobs who crush all political resistance to a capitalist dictatorship.
The novel presents itself as the recently discovered “Everhard Manuscript.” From its imaginary
vantage point in a socialist utopia some 700 years in
the future, the book’s fictional editor explains that
the Everhard Manuscript has been lost for centuries
and represents the best firsthand account of the origins of the Iron Heel and the start of the great class
war that would last nearly 300 years. The narrative
was written by Avis Everhard, the bourgeois daughter of a Berkeley university professor and the lover
of the novel’s true hero, Ernest Everhard. Ernest is

a proletarian philosopher and political agitator who
emerges from his electoral role in the Socialist Party
to become the underground leader of the “First
Great Uprising.”
The first half of the novel is blatantly didactic,
dominated by detailed discussions of socialist politics and economics. Originally skeptical of this
aggressive working-class hero, the strong-willed Avis
becomes converted to socialism through her own
investigation of a “tacit conspiracy” by capitalist society against an injured worker who has been tossed
on the scrap heap. Upon recognizing the moral
superiority of socialism, Avis becomes the lover, student, and political partner of Ernest as their world
gradually collapses into civil war. During a direct
confrontation between Ernest and the Oligarchy
(the last moment of civil “debate” before the coming
war), a man of wealth and few words stands up to
the intellectually and physically superior proletarian
to explain bluntly: “Our reply [to the worker’s revolution] shall be couched in terms of lead. We are in
power. Nobody will deny it. By virtue of that power
we shall remain in power. . . . We will grind you revolutionists down under our heel, and we shall walk
upon your faces. The world is ours, we are its lords,
and ours it shall remain.” These words mark the
birth of the Iron Heel.
The battle between socialism and the Iron Heel
is formally joined, and the novel, which began as a
slow political romance, rapidly accelerates into a
chaotic adventure story. The first signs of counterrevolution appear in the form of “patriotic” mobs
known as the “Black Hundreds” who rise up and
destroy union halls and radical newspapers. With
time, the Oligarchy grows ever bolder: engineering
an economic crisis to eliminate the middle class,
plotting world wars with Germany to build up the
army, and provoking a “Peasants’ Revolt” of starving
farmers, which the Iron Heel destroys with characteristic gore. Yet, through this maelstrom of violence, Ernest prepares to run for Congress on the
socialist ticket in the 1912 election. However, he
alone is pragmatic enough to know that, given what
the Oligarch said to him, voting alone is not going to
overthrow the Iron Heel. So he begins to shift his
organizational work away from the democratic
355

The Iron Heel

sphere of reform and into the underground world
of revolutionary conspiracy. Taking up a new identity as revolutionary leader, Ernest begins the necessary work of rooting out infiltrators, establishing a
network of guerrilla “Fighting Organizations,” and
planning to infiltrate the Iron Heel itself. “It was
bitter bloody work,” writes Avis, “but we were fighting for life and for the Revolution, and we had to
fight the enemy with his own weapons. . . . It was
warfare dark and devious, replete with intrigue and
conspiracy, plot and counterplot.”
When a desperate electorate sweeps Ernest and
the socialists into office, the Iron Heel plots to
undermine democratic rule altogether. During a
fiery speech in the congressional chamber, an agent
of the Iron Heel throws a bomb at Ernest’s feet,
which injures the hero, but more importantly it
legitimates the arrest of all socialists as terrorists.
After this blow, the Iron Heel formally abolishes
democracy and asserts its dictatorial rule through
“labor castes, the Mercenaries, and the great hordes
of secret agents and police of various sorts.” When
the First Great Uprising fails with the cataclysmic
destruction of the “Chicago Commune” (in a terrifying scene reminiscent of the end of Ignatius Donnelly’s Caesar’s Column), many former socialists
form terrorist groups both noble and insane, taking
up a desperate and undisciplined war of revenge on
the Oligarchy. The manuscript cuts off in breathless
anticipation of the Second Great Uprising, thoroughly planned by our heroes and set to begin
when Ernest and Avis are captured and “disappeared” by the Iron Heel.
As both a novel and idea, The Iron Heel played an
important role in the culture of U.S. radicalism in
the first half of the twentieth century. The novel was
very popular with the Industrial Workers of the
World (IWW) and other revolutionary socialist circles. To these groups, The Iron Heel was used as an
entertaining educational tool as well as a theoretical
critique of “right-wing” or party socialists who believed that electoral politics could defeat capitalism.
The “Iron Heel”—much like Orwell’s “Big Brother”

356

for the post–World War II generation—served as a
potent metaphor for the conspiracies and control
mechanisms of the ruling class. For example, in
1914 the radical journalist John Kenneth Turner
evoked London’s novel to explain the meaning of
the Ludlow Massacre: “If the picture of blood and
terror so graphically painted in Jack London’s novel,
‘The Iron Heel,’ does not become a reality in the
near future it will not be the fault either of the persons in control of the industries of this country or of
those in possession of the reins of government. . . .
The evidence is unmistakable of a nation-wide conspiracy to break up organizations of labor, to discipline the workers, to suppress agitators, to outlaw
strikes, to nullify the tendencies that have been
working toward the establishment of a better society, and to steer the ship of capitalism in the safe
harbor of an industrial feudalism” (Turner).
The Iron Heel seemed to predict exactly the coming of World War I and the violent hysteria that
marked the red scare of 1919–1920. For the generation that followed London, The Iron Heel contains a
precise prophecy of the rise of fascism in Europe. Of
course, neither fascism nor a revolutionary underground of any size appeared in the United States,
leading to the novel’s unceremonious obscurity in
the second half of the twentieth century. However,
as the hope for social revolution passed from the
industrialized First World to the decolonizing Third
World, The Iron Heel found a new audience in Latin
America and wherever international military conspiracies, secret police, and the rich collaborated to
rule with an Iron Heel.
Michael Cohen
See also: Donnelly, Ignatius; Industrial Workers of
the World.
References
London, Jack. 1908. The Iron Heel. Chicago:
Charles H. Kerr and Co.
London, Jack. 1964. The Social Writing of Jack
London. Edited with an introduction by Philip S.
Foner. Secausus, NJ: Citadel Press.
Turner, John Kenneth. 1914. “Government by
Gunmen.” The Appeal to Reason, 9 May.

J
Jackson, Andrew
As a general, official, candidate, and especially as
seventh president of the United States, Andrew
Jackson (1767–1845) was and is one of the most
polarizing figures on the American scene. Because
of the Jacksonians’ occasionally lurid rhetoric and
Manichean approach to certain policy issues, historians have long been in the habit of including Jackson and his followers in the ranks of “paranoid” or
conspiracy theory–prone political movements. This
interpretation comes most powerfully from the
post–World War II “consensus” historians, led by
Richard Hofstadter, with their downplaying of class,
economic, and ideological conflict as forces in U.S.
history. The Jacksonians constantly described American society in these terms, and practiced a politics
of angry confrontation, so the consensus historians
set them down as demagogues using class rhetoric to
mask a capitalist agenda, or as conspiracy theorists
who, as David Brion Davis puts it, saw “the growing
inequality of wealth as the product of an aristocratic
conspiracy against the rights of the laboring classes”
(Davis, 69).
This view is inadequate. Coming to prominence
in a time of sweeping change—what more recent
scholars have labeled the “Market Revolution”—
the Jacksonians were expressing serious concerns
when they attacked their Monster Banks and hydras
of corruption. This revolution saw millions of Americans become wage laborers for the first time, subject to the will of employers and forced to meet

their daily needs by buying goods and services in
the marketplace. Inequalities of wealth deepened
as many traditional trades were decimated by
industrialization. The legal and institutional order
was remade in ways that maximized the power and
protected the earnings of capitalist entrepreneurs
over and against the rest of society. Finally, two
major economic depressions punctuated the Jacksonian era, the panics of 1819 and 1837, and in
those crashes millions of Americans found themselves suddenly susceptible to the fortunes and
policies of unfamiliar institutions like banks and
corporations, run by and for the benefit of a new
class of economic power brokers. In sum, while we
may find the Jacksonians’ analysis of the Market
Revolution extreme and their policy responses to it
crude and simplistic, the problems they perceived
were no paranoid delusions.
Jackson himself was probably a bit paranoid.
Much of his political career was spent crusading
against various enemies and evildoers, some open,
some hidden, but most not especially evil by any
objective analysis. Jackson tended to turn any issue
into a quest for personal vindication, and while this
tendency was an important flaw in Jackson’s character as a leader, it should not lead us to conclude
that he was always merely paranoid. In many cases,
they really were out to get him. The following is
just a sampling of the occasions when Jackson
detected conspirators at work against him, and vice
versa.

357

Jackson, Andrew

The Election of 1824 and
the “Corrupt Bargain”
Though Andrew Jackson’s candidacy began as a
merely local, tactical maneuver, the hero of New
Orleans emerged rapidly as a popular favorite, disrupting the presidential plans of House Speaker
Henry Clay and Monroe administration cabinet
members John Quincy Adams, William Crawford,
and John C. Calhoun. Jackson’s sudden rise was one
of the seminal events in U.S. political history, potentially placing the power of presidential selection
into the hands of popular majorities for the first
time.
Unfortunately, the U.S. political system was
unprepared for this development. The established
means of nominating presidential candidates, the
congressional caucus, fell apart when only one
quarter of the members attended. Crawford was
nominated but the supporters of Jackson, Adams,
and Clay ignored the caucus decision, setting up a
four-way presidential race that was guaranteed to
be difficult to resolve. Jackson finished first in the
popular and Electoral College voting, but fell short
of the required majority in the College. This meant
the final decision would have to be made in the
House of Representatives.
The Jacksonians expected the House to simply
ratify the people’s choice, but that was not a constitutional requirement. Though some feared riots if
Jackson was not elected, the House voting on 9
February 1825 had the look of a deal between the
Adams and Clay forces. The states that had given
their Electoral College votes to Clay went to
Adams, along with several Jackson states, making
Adams president. Rumors of a conspiracy to thwart
the people’s will circulated heavily, and one week
later they seemed to come true, when Adams
announced Clay as his choice for secretary of state.
Adams and Clay both denied that there had been
any arrangement, but the circumstantial evidence
for a perhaps unstated understanding between
them is strong.
The Jacksonians exploded in anger, denouncing
the election as a “corrupt bargain” against the people and Adams as a morally and democratically illegitimate president. Jackson’s own reaction was typi358

cally violent: “So you see, the Judas of the West has
closed the contract and will receive the thirty pieces
of silver. [H]is end will be the same” (Dangerfield,
228). His supporters used the battle cry of “bargain
and sale” to undermine the Adams administration’s
every move, finding sinister motives behind even
the most high-minded initiatives and the least significant decisions. Adams and Clay were dubbed
“the coalition,” a pejorative term in those days, used
to denote an alliance based purely on self-interest
and lust for power.
Missouri senator and ardent Jacksonian Thomas
Hart Benton led a congressional investigation of corruption in the administration. The committee issued
a report comparing Adams and Clay to the kings and
prime ministers of England before the American
Revolution. The coalition was supposedly out to
seize absolute power by using the government’s revenue to buy up supporters, specifically by appointing partisans to office and subsidizing friendly newspapers. Later a Committee on Retrenchment was
formed during the campaign year of 1828 to look
further into Adams’s alleged excesses. Of course, this
so-called spoils system of partisan appointments
expanded dramatically once the Jacksonians were in
power, despite their cries for “reform” while Adams
was president.
Ironically, all these attacks were directed at what
was probably one of the least partisan administrations in U.S. history. Most of the charges were exaggerated or fictitious, but all were made plausible by
the circumstances of Adams’s election. Whether
corrupt, a bargain, or not, the Adams-Clay coalition
was based on assumptions about the role of democracy in the constitutional system that suddenly
became outmoded in the 1820s. The founders may
have placed the election of the president in the
hands of the Electoral College and Congress, but in
practice it had become the province of the people
themselves.
Slaying the Monster Bank
Probably the best-known examples of Jacksonian
“paranoia” can be found in the so-called Bank War,
in which Jackson destroyed the Second Bank of the
United States first by vetoing a bill renewing its

Jackson, Andrew

charter and then by removing the government’s
deposits from the bank. Couched in some of the
most radical rhetoric ever to come out of the White
House, Jackson’s crusade against the bank struck
the institution’s defenders and most later commentators as extreme and hyperbolic if not downright
pathological.
Like the attacks on the “coalition,” Jacksonian
fears about the institution they sometimes called
the Monster were rooted in serious concerns. Giant
national institutions of any kind were virtually nonexistent in this period. The Bank of the United
States (BUS) was perhaps the first national business
corporation, and the only other real national institution of any kind, the federal government, had no
presence in most communities besides the local
post office. The BUS was not the Federal Reserve
or a government treasury. Instead, it was a privately
owned, profit-making commercial bank, with
branches across the country, that happened to enjoy
the very great privilege of holding the government’s
money on deposit.
From the inception of its first incarnation back
under Hamilton and Washington, the BUS had
been highly controversial, as much for its potential
for political abuse as for its economic power. Especially under the direction of Nicholas Biddle, who
assumed the presidency of the Second BUS in
1823, the national bank set the example followed by
most major U.S. corporations since, working to
maximize its influence by forging close ties with
politicians. Loans to lawmakers and political journalists were made freely, and several of the most
prominent congressional leaders, including Henry
Clay and Daniel Webster, were hired by the bank in
their private capacity as lawyers. The influential
New York Courier and Enquirer switched from
opposition to support of the BUS after a loan came
through. This sort of influence-buying is what the
Jacksonians were thinking of when they denounced
the BUS as a “hydra of corruption” (Watson, 154).
Banks themselves were unfamiliar, suspicious
institutions to most Americans of the early nineteenth century. Bank-loaned paper money was felt
to be, in essence, fake money (in contrast to gold
and silver) that encouraged reckless, groundless

speculative investments. Jackson told Biddle he had
been “afraid” of banks ever since reading about the
South Sea Bubble, a disastrous British investment
mania of the early eigthteenth century. Jackson had
also personally experienced a bank-driven financial
boom and bust. The BUS was widely blamed for a
banking and land speculation bubble that had burst
and plunged the country into a depression beginning in 1819. Newly reestablished at the end of the
War of 1812, the national bank had first failed to
restrain a rapid overexpansion of credit by new state
and local banks and then suddenly cracked down a
few years later to save itself. An epidemic of bankruptcy, unemployment, and homelessness ensued,
followed swiftly by tens of thousands of debt collection lawsuits that sent many debtors to jail. Thomas
Jefferson and Andrew Jackson were only two
among many major figures who barely escaped total
ruin in the panic of 1819, and many other similar
and lesser Americans were not so lucky.
Jackson’s home region and electoral base, the
West, was especially hard hit. The new western cities
like St. Louis and Cincinnati had been the center of
the land boom, and in aggressively collecting debts
after the crash, the BUS stripped hundreds of western farmers and businessmen of their property. By
some reports, most of Cincinnati ended up owned
by the BUS. Westerners responded with political
outrage that would fuel Jacksonianism later on. New
senator and future Jacksonian Thomas Hart Benton
of Missouri reported that his trip to Washington was
“one long ride amidst the crashings and explosions of
banks” (Chambers, 101). In Washington, Benton
helped launch the antibank crusade that Jackson
would finish a decade later, giving voice to many
westerners’ sense of sudden enslavement to an evil
foreign entity. “All the flourishing cities of the west
are mortgaged to this money power,” Benton thundered. “They are in the jaws of the monster! A lump
of butter in the mouth of a dog! One gulp, one swallow, and all is gone!” (Watson, 39).
The ideas of Jacksonians like “Old Bullion” Benton, so named for his advocacy of a “hard money”
currency of gold and silver coins only, can be seen
as typical conspiracy theories to the extent that they
blame large, disturbing changes on one villainous
359

Jackson, Andrew

institution. As with many other conspiracy theories,
this act of scapegoating allowed Jacksonians to avoid
both acknowledging the global, systemic forces at
work and admitting that any fundamental or irreversible damage had been done to U.S. society. A
villain or monster could be defeated more readily
than the Market Revolution or industrial capitalism.
The depth of Andrew Jackson’s own antipathy to
the BUS was not widely known during his first two
presidential campaigns and for most of his first
term as president. It came out only when his longtime political enemy Henry Clay, now a senator,
decided to press for early recharter of the BUS.
(The existing charter did not expire until 1836.)
Clay expected a veto and hoped to use the issue
against Jackson in the 1832 presidential race.
Though Thomas Hart Benton led a stiff resistance
and the Jacksonians had a majority in Congress,
enough of them defected to allow the recharter bill
to pass on 3 July 1832. The whole thing smelled of
corruption to Jackson, who was sick and suffering
intense pain at the time from an old bullet wound
in his arm. He took the recharter drive as a personal
challenge that had to beaten back: “The Bank . . . is
trying to kill me, but I will kill it” (Watson, 143).
The message that Jackson and his aides concocted to explain the veto remains a shocking presidential document, crackling with anger and critical
of dominant elements of U.S. society in a way that
would be impossible to imagine today. Hardest for
his opponents to take was Jackson’s harsh class rhetoric, condemning the wealthy for conspiring against
democracy and the welfare of the nation: “The rich
and powerful too often bend the acts of government
to their selfish purposes,” the veto message argued.
The document set the terms for the “Bank War”
that followed, boiling down a host of fears about the
social and political impact of the rise of corporate
capitalism into this one battle against a monstrously
large and dangerous bank. While also attacking the
bank as unconstitutional and overly beholden to
foreign investors, Jackson focused his greatest ire
on the way government involvement with business
inevitably led to the subversion of democratic institutions and values:

360

Many of our rich men have not been content with
equal protection and equal benefits, but have
besought us to make them richer by act of Congress.
By attempting to gratify their desires we have in the
results of our legislation arrayed section against
section, interest against interest, and man against
man, in a fearful commotion which threatens to
shake the foundations of our Union. (Jackson, 1832 )

Bank president Nicholas Biddle and his allies
thought this was crazy talk, that the veto message
would ruin Jackson: “It has all the fury of chained
panther biting the bars of his cage. It is really a
manifesto of anarchy” (Watson, 150). So convinced
was Biddle that the message would contribute to
Jackson’s downfall that he had thousands of copies
printed up and mailed at bank expense.
Obviously, this was far from the case. Jackson was
resoundingly reelected in 1832, an election that his
opponents tried to turn into a referendum on the
Bank War, with the aid of the BUS itself. As his second term opened, Jackson was determined to finish
what he had started. Fearful that Biddle’s political
loans and lobbying might secure another, perhaps
veto-proof recharter bill sometime in the Monster’s
remaining four years of life, Jackson and his advisors planned a preemptive strike. They would withdraw the government’s money from the BUS and
deposit it in a number of different state banks,
thereby crippling Biddle’s institution both financially and politically.
The recipient institutions were denounced as
“pet banks” by administration critics, and they were
indeed more Democrat-friendly in their politics
than the BUS. One long-standing interpretation of
the Bank War posits a “Wall Street Conspiracy” led
by Jackson’s henchman, vice-president, and successor, Martin Van Buren of New York. The BUS was
based in Philadelphia, then the nation’s financial
center, and historian Bray Hammond argued in the
1950s that Van Buren and New York bankers had
schemed to destroy Philadelphia’s preeminence by
getting the government’s money shifted to New
York and elsewhere. Later historians have debunked the idea of a Wall Street conspiracy, point-

Jackson, Andrew

ing out that the financial community as a whole
strongly opposed the removal of the deposits.
The removal of the deposits was a precipitous
step, of questionable legality and wisdom, that
could really only be justified in terms of the lurid
conspiratorial rhetoric about monsters and hydras
that the Jacksonians had been using. The secretary
of the treasury, not the president, controlled the
location of the deposits, and Jackson had to fire two
different treasury secretaries in 1833 before finding
one that would comply, Roger B. Taney, a coauthor
of the veto message. Even worse was the fact that
many of the evils that the Jacksonians had blamed
on the BUS would be made worse by spreading the
money around to other commercial banks even further from the government’s control. If banking itself
was a problem, then it became far worse during the
Bank War era, with the states chartering some 347
new banks between 1830 and 1837.
Where the removal of deposits did succeed
admirably was in provoking a response from
Nicholas Biddle that proved the Jacksonians’ point
about the threat that the BUS posed. “This worthy
president thinks that because he has scalped Indians
and imprisoned judges he is to have his way with the
Bank,” Biddle wrote. “He is mistaken” (Watson,
157). As Jackson’s congressional opponents sought
unsuccessfully to reverse the policy or punish the
president, Biddle engineered an artificial recession,
calling in the Bank’s loans more quickly than necessary, contracting credit and increasing unemployment sharply across the nation as businesses suddenly found themselves unable to finance their
operations. Biddle hoped the induced panic would
galvanize the business community in support of the
bank, but the opposite turned out to be true. He had
more or less conceded defeat in the fall of 1834, and
allowed prosperity to return.
The “Riot Year” and the Attempted
Assassination of Andrew Jackson
Though not well-known as such today, the period of
the Bank War was as restless, troubled, and paranoid
as any in U.S. history. Indeed, the “Great Riot Year”
of 1834 rivals 1919 or 1968 for the sheer depth and

breadth of unrest. As the removal of the deposits
and Biddle’s recession unfolded, a wave of political
violence broke out the likes of which the country
had not seen since the Revolution. Every imaginable
political and social division generated riots that pitted Jacksonian Democrats against their opponents,
workers against employers, whites against blacks,
“natives” against immigrants, Protestants against
Catholics, and various local communities against
such perceived fringe dwellers as abolitionists, Mormons, and even riverboat gamblers.
Unsurprisingly, some of this violent ill-will was
directed at Andrew Jackson, whose rabble-rousing
Bank War rhetoric was blamed by some for the
wave of unrest. In February1834, Jackson received
a note that said, “Damn your old soul, remove them
deposits back again, and re-charter the Bank, or you
will certainly be shot in less than two weeks, and
that by myself!!!” (Cole, 221).
This was the first of many threats that Jackson
received. Rumors spread that a rebel army of 5,000,
possibly financed by the Bank of the United States,
was being organized in Baltimore to overthrow the
president, and when Jackson was warned, he promised to hang them all high if such a army dared to
come after him.
Finally, just after the close of the “riot year”
(which led into a year that was actually more violent
by some measures), there was a real attempt on
Jackson’s life. On 30 January 1835 an unemployed
house painter named Richard Lawrence approached within 8 feet of Jackson as he was leaving
the Capitol after a congressman’s funeral. As Jackson
was receiving applause of the crowd gathered outside, leaning on Treasury Secretary Levi Woodbury,
Lawrence drew a pistol and fired with a loud bang;
then he drew a second pistol and fired again. Jackson hesitated to see if he was shot. Miraculously, he
wasn’t: it was a damp, muggy day and the pistol cap
had failed to set fire to the powder, in both guns!
Though he needed help to walk at this point in his
life, Old Hickory (as he was popularly known) lived
up to his tough-guy reputation on this occasion, letting go of Woodbury and going after Lawrence with
his cane.

361

Jackson, Andrew

By all accounts, Richard Lawrence was the original lone gunman. Depressed, angry, and occasionally delusive, Lawrence had previously tried to kill
his own sister and threatened other acquaintances.
In explaining his motives for trying to assassinate
Jackson, the painter sometimes followed Jackson’s
political opponents in blaming the president for the
hard economic times, but at other times Lawrence
claimed that the president had murdered his father
or was blocking his bid to take his rightful place as
King of England. A jury eventually wasted little
time acquitting Lawrence by reason of insanity.
Nevertheless, conspiracy theories circulated
about the attempt on Jackson, usually tailored to the
political interests of those who spread them. Some
rumor or other linked “almost every eminent politician” in Washington with the would-be assassin
(Rohrs, 150). Led by the administration spokespaper, the Washington Globe, the Jacksonian press
questioned Lawrence’s insanity and blamed the fiery
speeches of Jackson opponents, especially one given
by South Carolina senator John C. Calhoun two days
before the attack, for inspiring the attack. (Entertainment options in early Washington being limited,
the shooter really did hear Calhoun’s speech.) One
of the doctors who had examined Lawrence was
cited as agreeing that political controversy could
have driven him to murder.
Jackson himself believed that Lawrence had been
hired by Mississippi senator George Poindexter, a
personally violent man who was also one of the
administration’s most violent critics. Jackson told
some visitors on the day of the attack that Poindexter had turned to Lawrence because he was too cowardly to kill Jackson himself. Witnesses were found
who testified to seeing Lawrence at Poindexter’s
house. The evidence against “Old Poins” was serious
enough to warrant congressional investigation, but
the testimony of the two men who had been willing
to give affidavits against Poindexter, Mordecai Foy
and David Stewart, fell apart under scrutiny. Stewart could not correctly describe Lawrence and Foy
turned out not to know where Poindexter’s house
was. Other evidence surfaced indicating that government contractor Charles Coltman might have
offered work to Stewart, a blacksmith, for testimony
362

incriminating Poindexter. The Poindexter conspiracy theory itself began to look like, as the antiJackson United States Telegraph put it, “one of the
foulest conspiracies ever set on foot” (Rohrs, 159).
This last accusation should serve as a reminder
that Andrew Jackson and his supporters had no
monopoly on conspiratorial thinking. Regarding the
attempted assassination, the opposition press (along
with George Poindexter) argued that the whole
thing was a setup. They accused the Jacksonians of
arranging Richard Lawrence’s attack themselves to
keep Jackson high in the public’s favor despite the
widespread unrest and the continuing fallout from
the Bank War. The fact that both of Lawrence’s pistols failed to fire properly was regarded as too
unlikely to be accidental, and the Jacksonians had
made political hay out of threats to Jackson in the
past. Lawrence himself blamed the humid weather,
but the investigation showed that the pistols had
been loaded correctly and both performed flawlessly when tested. Of course, modern forensic
methods were still a distant dream in 1835, so it is
probably best not to place too much stock in the
tests. No link between Lawrence and the Jacksonians could ever be found, and once Lawrence and
Poindexter were cleared, the whole matter
descended to the level of mere partisan innuendo.
However, it was an index of the no-holds-barred
nature of Jacksonian era politics that charges of
conspiracy-linked assassination were made so
openly in such mainstream venues. The modern
equivalent would have been the New York Times
and Lyndon Johnson—not do-it-yourself conspiracy
theorists—accusing Richard Nixon or Barry Goldwater of hiring Lee Harvey Oswald immediately
after the Kennedy assassination.
The American Whigs versus
“King Andrew the First”
No review of the Jacksonian era would be complete
without some mention of the more general conspiracy fears expressed by Andrew Jackson’s opponents.
Beginning with the 1828 campaign, Jackson had
been the subject of some of the most remarkably
over-the-top vilification ever visited on a presidential
candidate. Aiming to frighten pious Christians across

Jackson, Andrew

the settled regions of the North, anti-Jackson newspapers depicted him as a martinet, bigamist, murderer, and all-around madman whose rule might literally bring hell on earth. Items like the famous
“coffin handbill” detailed Jackson’s career as a duelist
and as a cruel “military chieftain” who had executed
prisoners and his own men on numerous occasions.
The anti-Jacksonians were a disparate group that
finally coalesced during his second term into a new
national political organization, the Whig Party. The
new party’s name was rooted in the opposition’s
rather conspiratorial or at least histrionic take on
Jackson’s conduct during the Bank War. “Whig” was
the named used by both the parliamentary opponents of absolute monarchy in England as well as
the American opponents of British tyranny during
the Revolution. The nineteenth-century American
Whigs adopted the name because it encapsulated
their basic message that Jackson sought to become,
or already was, a dictator or king. A famous Whig
cartoon labeled the president “King Andrew the
First,” and pictured a crowned Old Hickory with
robes and scepter, trampling on the Constitution.
Although the President Who Would Be King was
undoubtedly a partisan campaign theme, the leading Whigs seemed to mean it in deadly earnest.
Jackson had a long record, going back to his military
career, of shrugging off legal restraints and treating
himself as the supreme authority. A number of
future Whigs had been bitterly critical of General
Jackson’s unauthorized conquest of Spanish Florida
back in 1818. Henry Clay had given a celebrated
speech depicting Jackson as a potential military dictator in the mold of Julius Caesar, Oliver Cromwell,
and Napoleon Bonaparte.
Jackson’s opponents warned voters about his dictatorial tendencies during his first two presidential
campaigns, and they found ample evidence in Old
Hickory’s presidency to support their fears. Southern anti-Jacksonians like Calhoun and Poindexter
were alarmed by Jackson’s uncompromising stance
and threats of force during the Nullification Crisis
of 1831–1833. For most northern and western
Whigs, the most troubling aspect of Jackson’s presidency was his use of the veto power against the
Bank of the United States and a number of so-called

“internal improvement” bills, mostly road and canal
bills. All of these measures were highly prized by
Henry Clay and other supporters of Clay’s so-called
American System of aggressive, governmentsponsored economic development, but the veto
itself was a major concern.
The veto power had always been controversial because it was an attribute of absolute monarchy that
the English Whigs had stripped from their kings in
the Glorious Revolution of 1689. Early U.S. state
governors often did not possess a veto. The presidential veto had been used only a handful of times
before the Jackson administration, and even then
(according to the Whigs) only on constitutional
grounds, never because a President simply disapproved of a policy and wanted to impose his will on
the rest of the government. Later in U.S. history, it
became expected that the president would set the
policy agenda for Congress, but in the early days of
the Republic this was regarded by many as executive
“usurpation,” a corrupt violation of the constitutional separation of powers. Thus Washington,
D.C.’s oldest and most established newspaper, the
National Intelligencer, could write, in apparent seriousness, that Jackson’s bank veto had rendered the
Constitution a “dead letter” and the “will of a DICTATOR . . . the Supreme Law!” (Watson, 152).
In fairness to the Whigs, their charges concerned
the tendency of Jackson’s actions and the character
of his leadership, and usually did not posit a literal
monarchical conspiracy. Yet if Jackson sought to kill
a symbolic monster in crusading against the Bank of
the United States, the Whigs had their own monster
in Jackson himself.
Jeffrey L. Pasley
See also: Bank of the United States; Bank War;
Biddle, Nicholas; Wall Street.
References
Blau, Joseph L., ed. 1964. Social Theories of
Jacksonian Democracy: Representative Writings
of the Period. Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill.
Chambers, William Nisbet. 1956. Old Bullion
Benton, Senator from the New West: Thomas
Hart Benton, 1782–1858. Boston, MA: Little
Brown.
Cole, Donald B. 1993. The Presidency of Andrew
Jackson. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.

363

Japanese Americans

Dangerfield, George. 1965. The Awakening of
American Nationalism, 1815–1828. New York:
Harper and Row.
Davis, David Brion, ed. 1971. The Fear of
Conspiracy: Images of Un-American Subversion
from the Revolution to the Present. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Gatell, Frank Otto. 1966. “Sober Second Thoughts
on Van Buren, the Albany Regency, and the Wall
Street Conspiracy.” Journal of American History
53: 19–40.
Hammond, Bray. 1957. Banks and Politics in
America: From the Revolution to the Civil War.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hofstadter, Richard. [1948] 1973. The American
Political Tradition, and the Men Who Made It.
Reprint, New York: Vintage Books.
Jackson, Andrew. 1832. “President Jackson’s Veto
Message Regarding the Bank of the United
States; July 10, 1832.” http://www.yale.edu/
lawweb/avalon/presiden/veto/ajveto01.htm.
Meyers, Marvin. 1960. The Jacksonian Persuasion:
Politics and Belief. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Prince, Carl E. 1985. “The Great ‘Riot Year’:
Jacksonian Democracy and Patterns of Violence
in 1834.” Journal of the Early Republic 3: 1–19.
Remini, Robert V. 1967. Andrew Jackson and the
Bank War. New York: W. W. Norton and Co.
Rohrs, Richard C. 1981. “Partisan Politics and the
Attempted Assassination of Andrew Jackson.”
Journal of the Early Republic 1: 149–163.
Sellers, Charles. 1991. The Market Revolution:
Jacksonian America, 1815–1846. New York:
Oxford University Press.
United States Congress. 1834–1856. The Debates
and Proceedings in the Congress of the United
States. Washington, DC: Gales and Seaton. http://
memory.loc.gov/ammem/amlaw/lwac.html.
Watson, Harry L. 1990. Liberty and Power: The
Politics of Jacksonian America. New York:
Noonday Press, Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

Japanese Americans
The Japanese American population became the target of a paranoid campaign in the United States
after the surprise Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor
on 7 December 1941. Thousands of West-Coast
Japanese Americans were incarcerated in concentration camps in 1942. While white America believed these Japanese Americans were potential
364

saboteurs and a “fifth column” within the United
States, the belief in a Japanese “conspiracy” was not
a new phenomenon—it built on a lengthy history of
suspicion and racism toward Japanese Americans
since their arrival in the United States in the late
nineteenth century.
Japanese began arriving in the United States,
principally on the West Coast, from the 1880s and
were quickly confronted by racist opposition. Labor
and trade unions in particular led the way, seeking to
prevent Japanese settling and working in the United
States. Such attitudes emerged from a history of
anti-Chinese sentiment; the Japanese were also disadvantaged due to laws that prevented them from
becoming citizens (only “white” immigrants could
become citizens, dating back to a 1770 law). Only
the second generation (known as Nisei), those born
in the United States, could be citizens. In the early
twentieth century the newspapers of William Randolph Hearst, along with a number of anti-Japanese
organizations, joined in the anti-Japanese crusade,
trumpeting the “Yellow Peril.” They predicted that
the Japanese would “crowd out the white race” on
the West Coast (Daniels, 116). The Japanese victory
over Russia in the Russo-Japanese War made Japan
seem a threatening Pacific power. Further, various
Japanese American community organizations were
viewed as sinister, and were even sometimes perceived as part of an eventual plot to take over the
United States.
Such paranoia had real results in pressuring
politicians to take stronger measures against the
Japanese. An alien land law enacted in California in
1913 was a response to agitation that Japanese were
taking over farmland and crowding out white farmers. It was in practice largely ineffective, and thus
led to increased, rather than diminished, tensions
and fears of Japanese conspiracies. The Immigration Act of 1924 hit the Japanese particularly
strongly, reducing the number of immigrants to a
negligible number.
Thus, when Pearl Harbor was attacked, revealing
the vulnerability of the United States and pitching
it into a fierce Pacific war, there was already an
atmosphere of mistrust and paranoia toward Japanese Americans that was ready to be heightened to

Japanese Americans

An American soldier guarding a crowd of Japanese American internees at an internment camp at Manzanar, California,
during World War II. (Hulton-Deutsch Collection/Corbis)

hysteria. There was also a history of racist government policies that, when added to the “exigencies of
war” by which so much has often been justified,
made the violation of fundamental civil liberties
acceptable. In the days following Pearl Harbor,

“enemy aliens” became the target of federal and
state government security measures. The 8 December 1941 edition of the San Francisco Chronicle
recorded the first roundup of “suspicious characters” and noted that the San Francisco police were
365

Jefferson, Thomas

mobilized to meet the threat of “sabotage.” Despite
protestations of loyalty from the Japanese American
community, belief that they were all potential saboteurs, spies, and fifth columnists ready to aid a Japanese attack on mainland America was pervasive. By
February 1942, many areas were barred to enemy
aliens, which, the San Francisco Chronicle argued,
would guard against “sabotage and other fifth column activities”; on 3 February the paper also
quoted California Attorney General Earl Warren,
who declared “every alien Japanese should be considered in the light of a potential fifth columnist.”
Newspapers fomented this anti-Japanese hysteria, and along with a military keen to exercise strong
internal security measures and politicians acutely
aware of the need to respond to the demands of
their constituents, it was perhaps inevitable that
some action would be taken. Military leaders spoke
of the threat of the “fifth column”; they were also
keen to apportion at least part of the blame for the
disaster of Pearl Harbor on a Hawaiian–Japanese
American fifth column. At the same time, people
like Walter Lippmann, one of America’s most
respected journalists and social commentators,
talked of the imminent danger of attack from both
without and within the West Coast. Lieutenant
General John L. DeWitt, head of the Western
Defense Command, sanctioned mass searches of
Japanese homes, and a system by which Japanese
Americans were forced to register and were prevented from traveling. Slowly rights were stripped
from Japanese Americans. On 13 February, a
Pacific Coast congressional delegation sent President Franklin D. Roosevelt a unanimous recommendation urging “immediate evacuation of all persons of Japanese lineage,” and six days later
Roosevelt signed Exceutive Order 9066 by which
over 120,000 people, a majority of whom were U.S.
citizens, were put into concentration camps. There
were legal appeals arguing the unconstitutionality
of these actions but little was done. Over the
remaining years of World War II, some groups were
released and resettled in the East and Midwest;
others were pressured to renounce their citizenship
and some of these, along with some noncitizens,
were repatriated to Japan.
366

The war years saw the culmination of a deepseated racist mistrust of Japanese Americans; the
years following the war saw movements to end legal
discrimination against Asian Americans, including
the Japanese. But recognition of what was done in
World War II was slow. Ultimately, in February
1976, Gerald Ford signed Proclamation 4417, formally recognizing the events of the war years as a
“national mistake.” In the 1980s, a Commission on
the Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians
reported on the events and opened the way for
redress, financial and otherwise, for the survivors.
The treatment of Japanese Americans from their
arrival in the United States until the end of World
War II reveals how racial paranoia and fear toward
an ethnic group can be exaggerated into a belief in
conspiracies to undermine democracy and threaten
safety, and given the right circumstances can
become a basis for unjust actions and a threat to the
very democracy in whose name these actions are
invoked.
Amanda Laugesen
References
Daniels, Roger. 1971. Concentration Camps USA:
Japanese Americans and World War II New York:
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
———. 1988. Asian America: Chinese and Japanese
in the United States since 1850. Seattle:
University of Washington Press.
———. 1993. Prisoners without Trial: Japanese
Americans in World War II. New York: Hill and
Wang.
Los Angeles Times, December 1941–March 1942.
San Francisco Chronicle, December 1941–March
1942.
Smith, Page. 1995. Democracy on Trial: The
Japanese American Evacuation and Relocation in
World War II. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Takaki, Ronald. 1989. Strangers from a Different
Shore: A History of Asian-Americans. Boston:
Little, Brown and Company.

Jefferson, Thomas
Thomas Jefferson was born 13 April 1743, in what
is now Albemarle County, Virginia. Jefferson was a
member of the Continental Congress, author of the
Declaration of Independence, governor of Virginia,

Jefferson, Thomas

minister to France, secretary of state, and vicepresident, and became the third president of the
United States in 1800. One of America’s most influential but, in his day, controversial leaders, Jefferson was at the center of several important conspiratorial episodes.
The Botanical Expedition
Thomas Jefferson and James Madison set out on a
month-long botanizing excursion to New York during April–May of 1791. The intent of the travelers
was to observe the flora and fauna of the region and
its scenic beauty, and to visit historic sites of revolutionary fame. It is likely that these men welcomed
the opportunity to make political inquiries in the
towns where they visited. Such activities did not go
unnoticed. In fact, it was the view of some New
York Federalists that the secret purpose of their
tour was to cement an alliance between the New
York Republicans and their Old Dominion counterparts to the south. Jefferson and Madison unified,
and established a popular base for, the Republican
Party through key political visits on their journey.
Certainly, the Federalists viewed this trip as a
threat, and conspiracy theories were abundant. (It
may seem strange that the building of a political
alliance might be considered a conspiracy, but the
very notion of a political party was considered conspiratorial in the era of the Founders.) New York
Governor Clinton “seems not to have noticed the
touring Virginians, nor did they call on him” (Peterson, 440). If any alliances were struck between Jefferson and Clinton, Burr, or anyone else on this trip,
they were very secret indeed.
Jefferson as an Agent of
France and Revolution
By far the most intense and significant conspiracy
theory regarding Jefferson was the widespread Federalist belief that he and his followers were fellow
travelers or outright agents of the French Jacobins
and their revolutionary agenda of radical republicanism, social egalitarianism, and religious “infidelity.” This belief first emerged while Jefferson
was secretary of state in the early 1790s. As the
French declared their nation a republic and exe-

cuted King Louis XVI, America was riven with controversy over the French Revolution and the resulting series of wars between France and the monarchies of Europe. Based on a few letters of his that
leaked to the press and the statements of his many
allies, Jefferson acquired a reputation as the French
Revolution’s leading supporter in America. Subsequently the charge that he was not just a friend but
a tool of France became a primary theme of Jefferson’s opponents, and would remain so for most of
the rest of his political career.
Jefferson-as-conspirator was the subject of one of
America’s earliest political cartoons, “The Providential Detection.” This anonymous drawing depicts an
American eagle about to claw the eyes of Jefferson as
he tries to burn the Constitution on an “Altar to Gallic Despotism,” encapsulating the conservative argument that further democratization in America would
inevitably lead to dictatorship as it had in France.
The eagle represents the belligerent, repressive
Federalist policies of the John Adams administration, which included the Alien and Sedition Acts,
legislation that aimed to crush the Jacobin conspiracy once and for all. Significantly, the fire on Jefferson’s altar is fueled by copies of the two leading
Democratic Republican newspapers, the Philadelphia Aurora and the Boston Independent Chronicle,
as well the anti-Christian writings of Thomas Paine
(The Age of Reason) and William Godwin. This
reflected the Federalist belief that publications dissenting from established political and religious doctrines were not contributions to public debate, but
part of a larger conspiracy against not only the U.S.
government, but also the orderly, hierarchical,
Christian society that Federalists believed they were
defending. Some Federalists even believed that Jefferson and his followers were secretly the American
wing of the infamous Bavarian Illuminati.
In politics, the Federalists relied especially on
the threats that Jefferson, who held liberal but far
from atheistic ideas on religion, allegedly posed to
Christianity in America. (During the “Reign of Terror” period in France, Robespierre’s Jacobin regime
had converted the churches into Temples of Reason.) The Philadelphia Gazette of the United States,
a nationally read Federalist newspaper, ran notices
367

Jefferson, Thomas

throughout the election season of September 1800,
putting the Federalist message bluntly (Cunningham, 154):
THE GRAND QUESTION STATED
At the present solemn and momentous epoch, the
only question to be asked by every American, laying
his hand on his heart is “shall I continue in
allegiance to
GOD—AND A RELIGIOUS PRESIDENT;
or impiously declare for
JEFFERSON—AND NO GOD!!

The religious campaign against Jefferson was most
intense in once-Puritan New England, which was
both the Bible Belt of early America and the Federalists’ electoral stronghold. New England Federalist
politicians and clergy bombarded the people of the
region with apocalyptic warnings about the consequences of a Jefferson victory in the presidential
election of 1800. Former Massachusetts congressman Fisher Ames painted this eventuality as “the
abasement of all that is venerable . . . the transmutation of all that is established” (Horn et al., 122–123).
Nor did this sort of talk stop once Jefferson was in
office. Having lost the nation as a whole but holding
New England in 1800, Federalists circled the wagons in the face of intense Democratic Republican
efforts to win over the voters of their states. Their
warnings about Jefferson grew almost comically hysterical, especially given the relatively modest policy
changes that Jefferson’s administration was implementing at the time. Attempting to rally his home
state of Connecticut “to resist a foe, just entering the
gates of your fortress,” Theodore Dwight outlined
“the consummation of Democratic blessedness” that
awaited the Land of Steady Habits if it too succumbed to the revolutionary legions who had
already overrun most of Europe and in the recent
election “secured . . . dominion over a large portion
of these United States.” Unless Connecticut made a
stand, her people faced the literally hellish prospect
of “a country governed by blockheads, and knaves;
the ties of marriage . . . destroyed; our wives, and
our daughters . . . thrown into the stews; our children . . . forgotten . . . a world full of ignorance,
368

impurity, and guilt; without justice, without science,
without affection . . . without worship, without a
prayer, without a God!” (Horn et al., 123).
This sort of scaremongering rang increasingly
hollow as it became obvious that the women and
children of New England were in no danger from
President Jefferson, and most of that region joined
in reelecting him handily in 1804.
Aaron Burr and the
Electoral College Deadlock
Jefferson and his supporters had a conspiracy problem of their own in 1800. They were so sure of Jefferson’s imminent victory after key legislative races
were won—many states still appointed presidential
electors—that they made arrangements to ensure
Aaron Burr would receive sufficient votes from
southern states to become vice-president. Jefferson
was surprised to learn that the vote in the South fell
more heavily to Burr than was expected. The election resulted in a tie between Jefferson and Burr,
each with seventy-three electoral votes, which was
to be resolved in the House of Representatives. Bitterly opposed to Jefferson and his Republican ideology, the Federalists conspired to deny him the presidency. The Federalists allied themselves in favor of
the challenger, Aaron Burr, in spite of his reported
disavowal of candidacy. In spite of their best efforts,
on Tuesday, 17 February, the thirty-sixth ballot in
the House of Representatives resulted in Jefferson’s
election. “Even in defeat they acted a miserable
part, most Federalists withholding their votes from
Jefferson to the bitter end” (Peterson 1970, 651). As
president, Burr would have been beholden to the
Federalists who supported him, ensuring their continued influence in the federal government. Relations between Jefferson and Burr deteriorated, and
several years later Jefferson pronounced him guilty
of treason and called for his arrest.
Jeremy L. Hall and Jeffrey L. Pasley
See also: Alien and Sedition Acts; Anti-Federalists;
Hamilton, Alexander.
References
Cunningham, Noble E., Jr., ed. 1965. The Making of
the American Party System, 1789 to 1809.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Jesuits

Ellis, Joseph. 1997. American Sphinx: The Character
of Thomas Jefferson. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Horn, James, Jan Ellen Lewis, and Peter S. Onuf,
eds. 2002. The Revolution of 1800: Democracy,
Race, and the New Republic. Charlottesville:
University of Virginia Press.
Library of Congress. Religion and the Founding of
the American Republic. Online exhibition at
http://lcweb.loc.gov/exhibits/religion/religion.html.
Pasley, Jeffrey L. 2001. “The Tyranny of Printers”:
Newspaper Politics in the Early American
Republic. Charlottesville: University Press of
Virginia.
Peterson, Merrill D. 1960. The Jefferson Image in
the American Mind. New York: Oxford University
Press.
———. 1970. Thomas Jefferson and the New
Nation. New York: Oxford University Press.

Jesuits
The Jesuits have always made up a prominent part
of anti-Catholic beliefs and conspiracy theories. It is
the largest religious order of men in the Catholic
Church today, with approximately 21,000 Jesuits
worldwide and 4,500 in the United States. The
Jesuits currently operate twenty-eight colleges and
universities in the United States, including Georgetown in Washington, D.C. In addition to education
and parish ministry, the order also provides opportunities for lay volunteers to assist the poor through
the Jesuit Volunteer Corps. Despite these many
contributions to the common good, the Jesuits are
central to many anti-Catholic conspiracy theories.
Why the Jesuits figure so prominently in this paranoia can be better understood by looking at the history and special character of this religious order.
The founder of the Jesuits, St. Ignatius of Loyola
(1495–1556), was born in the Basque region of
Spain. As a young man, he dreamed of a military life
by which he would win glory for himself and
acclaim from the ladies. This worldly dream was cut
short when Ignatius was crippled by a cannonball
during the siege of Pamplona. While recuperating,
Ignatius experienced a profound conversion and
decided to take the same discipline he experienced
as a soldier and apply it to a new religious order,

which he hoped would be a new army for the
Church. This was the Society of Jesus, which was
founded in 1540.
Through combining discipline and learning, the
Jesuits became a powerful new force in Roman
Catholicism. Of great significance for the Americas
was the interest the Jesuits took in foreign missions.
The first Jesuits to arrive in the future United States
were Fathers Andrew White (1579–1656) and John
Altham (1589–1640) and Brother Thomas Gervase
(1590–1637). Together, they established a mission
in southern Maryland in 1634.
One of the characteristics of the Jesuit order was
that, in addition to the three traditional monastic
vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience, there was
added the fourth vow of special obedience to the
pope. The order was founded in the midst of
the Protestant Reformation, when it appeared
that the religious world of Europe was in tatters.
Ignatius responded to this situation by stressing
obedience to church authority in these chaotic
times. Certainly, to people living centuries later, the
manner in which Ignatius expressed his sixteenthcentury understanding of obedience could be quite
unsettling. The faithful should be always ready to
uphold and defend the precepts of the Church, and
never criticize these in any manner; his view of obedience was strict and sounded very much like blind
faith. In the constitution he wrote for the order,
Ignatius stressed that a Jesuit should be completely
obedient to the pope and the leaders of the order.
This stress on obedience, as well as their great success in the Counter-Reformation, led the Jesuits to
be especially feared by Protestants. In 1585 Queen
Elizabeth I of England issued the Act against Jesuits
and Seminarianists, which banished all Jesuits from
England and its territories.
The perceived threat of the Jesuits led to similar
such legislation in the American colonies. In 1647
the colony of Massachusetts Bay passed the AntiPriest Law. After reviewing the violence and unrest
on the European continent and claiming that these
were caused by “those of the Jesuiticall order,” this
law stated that no Jesuit was to come within the territory of the colony and that any currently residing
in Massachusetts Bay were to be banished. Should
369

Jesuits

any who were banished return to the colony, they
were to be put to death.
Forty-three years later Massachusetts passed an
even stricter law, the Act against Jesuits and Popish
Priests, on 17 June 1700. This decreed that “every
Jesuit, seminary priest, missionary, or other spiritual
or ecclesiastical person” was to depart the colony
within three months. Any captured after that date
would be imprisoned for life and subject to execution if they tried to escape. Anyone hiding or aiding
in any way a member of the “Romish clergy” would
be fined 200 pounds and pilloried for three days.
At the time of independence the American
Catholic community numbered only about 25,000,
but this was to change dramatically because of
immigration. Beginning with the Irish in the early
nineteenth century, and followed by the Germans,
Italians, and Poles, the Catholic population reached
1.6 million in 1850 and 12 million in 1900. This created a tense situation in the United States, because
although the country was predominately Protestant,
its largest denomination was the Catholic Church,
which alarmed many Protestants, to whom this
increase looked more like an invasion than immigration. And leading this threat to the country, they
were sure, were the Jesuits.
A great number of anti-Catholic writings emerged
in the nineteenth century. In 1882 Edwin A. Sherman published The Engineer Corps of Hell, which
included the infamous Secret Instructions of the
Society of Jesus. This was supposed to be a kind of
classified procedure manual for the top echelon of
the Jesuit Order. Among its contents were chapters
on how to gain influence over princes, magnates,
and the wealthy. Three chapters were devoted to the
methods by which rich widows were to be convinced
to enter religious life and give their money to the
order.
A very popular anti-Catholic work from the nineteenth century that remains in print was Fifty Years
in the Church of Rome. Written in 1885 by Charles
Chiniquy, who claimed to be a former priest, the
book warned of the threat of the Jesuits to U.S. liberty: “The American people must be very blind
indeed, if they do not see that if they do nothing to
prevent it, the day is very near when the Jesuits will
370

rule their country, from the magnificent White
House at Washington, to the humblest civil and military department of this vast Republic” (Chiniquy,
374).
In the early twentieth century there appeared
E. G. White’s The Great Controversy (1911). White
warned his fellow Americans that the Jesuits were
“the most cruel, unscrupulous, and powerful of all
the champions of popery. . . . There was no crime
too great for them to commit, no deception too base
for them to practice, no disguise too difficult for
them to assume.” To those who countered that the
Jesuits appeared holy, White responded that
although the members of the order wore a garb of
sanctity, this was only a disguise. Beneath this
blameless exterior, he claimed, was a deadly intent
against all that the American people stood for. A
fundamental principle for the Jesuits, White said,
was that the end justifies the means: “By this code,
lying, theft, perjury, assassination, were not only
pardonable but commendable, when they served
the interests of the church. Under various disguises
the Jesuits worked their way into offices of state,
climbing up to be the servants of kings, and shaping
the policy of nations” (White, 233–235).
In 1960 a Catholic was finally elected president
of the United States. Despite all the dire predictions, the massacre of Protestants and suspension of
liberties did not take place, nor were Jesuits
appointed wholesale to key government posts. A
good deal of anti-Catholic bigotry subsided after
the election of Kennedy, but it did not all go away.
Hate groups with an anti-Catholic bias and belief in
a worldwide Jesuit conspiracy still remain.
During the 1980s there appeared various print
materials attacking the papacy and the Jesuits.
Chick Publications issued a cartoon book in 1983
entitled The Poor Pope? that claimed that the Vatican “almost destroyed the United States when her
Jesuits engineered the Civil War and murdered
Abraham Lincoln. Her Jesuits even set up World
Wars I and II, which has been carefully covered up”
(Chick, 20).
In 1984 the Tony and Susan Alamo Foundation
published and widely distributed a pamphlet entitled The Pope’s Secrets. Typical of anti-Catholic con-

Jewish Defense League

spiracy theories, the pamphlet blames the Vatican
and its Jesuit agents for all of the world’s woes. The
scope and power claimed for this conspiracy is truly
impressive: “Because of her age-old desire to control
the world government and church, the serpent-like
Vatican has infested the world and the U.S. government with so may of her zealous, highly-trained and
dedicated Jesuit devotees, that she now controls the
United Nations (which she created); the White
House; Congress; every state, federal, civic, and
social government agency including the U.S.
Department of Labor, the IRS, the FBI, Supreme
Court, judicial systems, the arms forces; state, federal and other police; also the international banking
and federal reserve systems (called the Illumniati
and Agentur), labor unions, the Mafia and most of
the heavy-weight news media” (Alamo, 1).
This worldwide conspiracy includes communism
under “Jesuit-trained” Fidel Castro, the corruption
of youth with drugs by “Jesuit Vatican-trained” Timothy Leary, and control of the Israeli parliament,
where some “Israelites have converted to this sect
(Roman Catholicism). The Vatican wanted them to
become rabbis so that they could place them in the
Israeli Knesset as spies. Some of these Roman
Jesuit rabbis are there today” (ibid., 1). Finally, the
pamphlet makes much of Jesuit assassins dutifully
removing enemies of the pope, including Abraham
Lincoln and John F. Kennedy. The assassination of
Kennedy is an interesting twist on the old fear of a
Catholic president. The claim is that Kennedy was
assassinated because he wouldn’t turn the country
over to the Vatican.
Today the Internet has become a major outlet disseminating Jesuit conspiracy theories. One example
is a web page sponsored by the Pacific Institute, a
group founded in San Diego in 1977 “for the express
purpose of Biblical research.” Entitled “America will
soon lose its Constitution,” it warns of the great
threat of the Jesuit conspiracy in the United States:
“Today the pope’s Jesuits are not only entrenched at
the highest levels of all branches and departments of
the U.S. Government, but they are also entrenched
at the highest levels of virtually all the major corporations and industries in the United States. . . . Our
God-given Constitution is the reason the United

States has become the greatest country in the world,
but it is being thoroughly undermined today by the
Jesuits in the government as they work to destroy
the United States” (www.pacinst.com/america.htm).
The group blames excessive environmental regulations and gun control laws on Jesuit politicians in
Congress, and they even blame Jesuits for the
tragedy of September 11.
Dennis Castillo
See also: Anti-Catholicism; Nativism.
References
Alamo, Tony. 1984. The Pope’s Secrets. Alma, AR:
End Time Books.
Bainton, Roland. 1966. Christendom. New York:
Harper and Row.
Bettenson, Henry. 1999. Documents of the Christian
Church. New York: Oxford University Press.
Chick, Jack. 1984. The Poor Pope? Chino, CA:
Chick Publications.
Chiniquy, Charles. 1885. Fifty Years in the Church
of Rome. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Book House.
Ellis, John Tracy. 1962. Documents of American
Catholic History. Milwaukee, WI: Bruce
Publishing Co.

Jewish Defense League
Although it was initially organized to protect Jews in
crime-ridden neighborhoods in New York City, the
Jewish Defense League (JDL) became best known
for its occasionally violent protest activities directed
against Russian anti-Jewish policies and Arab terrorism. This militant organization soon became involved in an unlikely, even bizarre, political alliance
and was also subjected to both U.S. and local government surveillance. The 1990 assassination of the
founder, Meir Kahane, later raised serious questions about an Arab conspiracy, fueled by much new
evidence discovered in the wake of the terrorist
attacks of 11 September 2001.
Paradoxically, some members of the Jewish Defense League—who professed profound concern for
the physical safety and welfare of their coreligionists—were implicated in the 26 January 1972 murder of a Jewish secretary, Iris Kones. This tragic
killing took place during the firebombing of the New
371

Jewish Defense League

York office of Sol Hurok, who promoted cultural
exchanges with the Soviet Union. Later, however,
some charges were dropped against the JDL members because of illegal police procedures and other
problems for the prosecution. Almost all mainstream
Jewish organizations considered the JDL a violent,
extremist group and regularly denounced its leader.
Founded in the spring of 1968 by the charismatic
rabbi Meir Kahane and a group of politically conservative New York City Jews, the JDL and its activities were regularly featured in the New York media
and, occasionally, the national press. Indeed, one
member boasted that the U.S. ambassador to the
United Nations, George H. W. Bush, complained to
Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir that JDL activities were endangering détente with the Soviet
Union (Dolgin, 39).
Although the JDL was a right-wing organization,
both its methods and often violent rhetoric seemed
to mirror radical leftist groups of the 1960s. Leon
Wieseltier, the New Republic literary editor and a
JDL member for a brief time, once boasted to his
parents that Eldridge Cleaver was making him a
better Jew (Wieseltier, 25).
Although many journalists and academics have
written numerous articles describing and analyzing
the political activities and philosophy of the JDL,
relatively little attention has been paid to an unusual
political alliance that developed during the early
years of the organization. After Meir Kahane was
freed on bail in Brooklyn Federal Court on 3 May
1971 from an indictment of conspiracy to transport
weapons across state lines, Joseph A. Colombo, Sr.,
a major Mafia figure, appeared in a joint news conference with the JDL leader and announced an
alliance with him. Colombo declared that the rabbi
was “fighting for his people in Russia and we’re
fighting for our [Italian] people here . . . if they [the
JDL] need our support, we will give it” (Kaplan, 1).
A year earlier, Colombo and some of his mob
associates had formed the New York–based Italian
American Civil Rights League—grist for comedians
and editorial cartoonists—whose mission was to
fight anti-Italian prejudice, especially the depiction
of all Italians as gangsters. Barry Slotnick, counsel
to the newly established organization, was also the
372

attorney for Kahane, and reportedly helped introduce these two controversial figures to each other.
A New York Times editorial (15 May 1971)
expressed puzzlement about this bizarre organizational alliance: the Italian American Civil Rights
League seemed an unlikely group to place as one of
its top priorities concern over the mistreatment of
Soviet Jews; similarly, JDL members would not
likely highlight as a major issue in its political agenda
the removal of the names “Mafia” and “Cosa Nostra”
from the television program The FBI. Nevertheless,
some analysts suggested that Kahane and Colombo
forged this alliance to mobilize jointly their respective supporters against their alleged systematic
harassment by the U.S. Department of Justice.
The real reason for the alliance might never be
known. On 29 June 1971, Joseph Colombo, Sr., was
shot three times in the head and neck at an Italian
American Unity Day Rally held at Columbus Circle
and attended by an estimated 100,000 supporters.
Colombo was in a coma for seven years and died on
22 May 1978. His assailant—who was immediately
shot and killed by Colombo’s bodyguards—was
Jerome A. Johnson, an African American who allegedly had mob ties in Harlem.
Almost two decades later, Rabbi Meir Kahane also
suffered a violent death. On 5 November 1990, an
Egyptian janitor named El Sayyid Nosair assassinated the JDL leader before a group of JDL supporters at the Marriott Hotel in midtown Manhattan.
Subsequent investigations found intriguing connections between Nosair and many terrorists involved in
either the first or second attacks on the World Trade
Center (WTC) and also other worldwide terrorist
activities perpetrated by Al-Qaeda. Immediately captured after the Kahane shooting, Nosair was later
found to be a follower of the exiled Egyptian cleric
Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, then based in Jersey
City, New Jersey. He was reportedly the spiritual
leader who inspired the first World Trade Center
bombing on 26 February 1993. Furthermore, police
discovered that Mohammed Salameh and Mahmoud
Abouhalima—who were key players in the WTC
bombing—were staying in Nosair’s house also in Jersey City, located near Abdel-Rahman’s mosque.
Nosair’s cousin, Ibrahim el-Gabrowny obtained a

John Birch Society

$20,000 contribution from Osama bin Laden for
Nosair’s legal defense. Wadi El-Hage, the key AlQaeda operative involved in the 1998 bombings of
the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, visited
Nosair in his U.S. prison, several years before he
went to East Africa. El Sayyid Nosair, who was
acquitted of the Kahane murder in a state trial in
1991, was convicted in 1995 on a federal charge of
murder in aid of racketeering, and was sentenced to
life in prison.
Donald Altschiller
See also: September 11.
References
Dolgin, Janet E. 1977. Jewish Identity and the JDL.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Kaplan, Morris. 1971. “Kahane and Colombo Join
Forces to Fight Reported U.S. Harassment.” New
York Times, 14 May, 1.
Ragavan, Chitra, et al. 2003. “How the World Trade
Center Plot Sowed the Seeds for 9/11” U.S. News
and World Report, 24 February, 28–30.
Rosenthal, Richard. 2000. Rookie Cop: Deep
Undercover in the Jewish Defense League.
Wellfleet, MA: Leapfrog Press.
Wieseltier, Leon. 1985. “The Demon of the Jews.”
New Republic, 11 November.

John Birch Society
The John Birch Society was founded by Robert
Welch on 8 December 1958, following a lecture
given by Welch to eleven wealthy businessmen in
Indianapolis, Indiana. Welch, a onetime candy manufacturer from Cambridge, Massachusetts, used his
comments to outline his disillusionment with the
moderate leadership of the Republican Party and to
express his belief that a “Communist conspiracy”
threatened to overturn capitalism and hijack the
U.S. government. Taking its name from a U.S. captain who had been killed by Chinese Communists in
the final days of World War II—the “first casualty” of
the burgeoning cold war—the society went on to
become one of the largest and best-known political
action organizations of the late 1950s and early
1960s. Although its membership rolls were kept
secret (the society’s commitment to conspiracy was
supplemented with a healthy dose of paranoia), his-

torians have estimated that by 1962 the Birchers
boasted over 60,000 members and $1.5 million in
annual income (Dallek).
The worldview of Welch and his followers was
anything but complex. Simply put, all of their beliefs
revolved around the understanding that “Communism, in its unmistakable present reality, is wholly a
conspiracy, a gigantic conspiracy to enslave mankind; an increasingly successful conspiracy controlled by determined, cunning, and utterly ruthless
gangsters, willing to use any means to achieve its
end” (Welch, 21). To Welch and his followers, the
United States was fighting a losing battle against this
global conspiracy. If the United States was indeed
the strongest nation on the planet, yet its leaders
could not contain the spread of communism, then
these same leaders must be consciously or unwittingly colluding with the Communists. Respected
U.S. political and judicial leaders, such as President
Dwight D. Eisenhower and Supreme Court Justice
Earl Warren, were therefore cast as willing pawns in
the Communist takeover of the United States. The
programs that Eisenhower, whom Welch described
as a “tool of the Communists,” and other politicians
supported—programs such as the continued growth
of the welfare state, a commitment to civil rights legislation, membership in the United Nations, and
increases in foreign aid—were thus seen as eroding
U.S. sovereignty and power, allowing the Communists to infiltrate all levels of U.S. government. Such
institutions as labor unions, churches, and schools
were powerless to stop these developments, as they
too had been penetrated by known Communists.
The Birchers stood as the nation’s last line of
defense against the pawns of global communism.
Faced with such a formidable foe, the Birchers
did not call for violent counterrevolution or any
other sort of undemocratic action. Rather, the society stressed education and grassroots political
organizing as the ways to combat the Communist
conspiracy. Welch urged Birchers to create new
anticommunist radio programs and to establish
“reading rooms” stocked with such right-wing publications as the society’s own American Opinion,
the Dan Smoot Report, and the National Review. In
the political arena, the Birchers worked to capture
373

Johnson, Lyndon Baines

the leadership posts in such important Republican
organizations as the Young Republicans and the California Republican Assembly. Once established in
these positions of authority, Birchers provided conservative candidates such as 1964 presidential hopeful Barry Goldwater with trained personnel of political organizers. The society also exerted tremendous
influence at the local level, running like-minded
candidates for school boards, city councils, and
numerous other offices across the nation.
In the aftermath of Goldwater’s defeat, Welch’s
conspiracy theories grew more and more bizarre.
Developing a broad historical perspective, Welch
now saw the roots of the Communist conspiracy in
the eighteenth century, more specifically in the Illuminati, a secret society founded by Adam
Weishaupt in Bavaria in 1776. The elite members of
the Illuminati, whom Welch referred to rather
vaguely as the “Insiders,” had been conspiring to
overthrow “all existing human institutions” and
become “the all-powerful rulers of a ‘new order’ of
civilization” for close to 200 years. The first overt
action of these plotters was the French Revolution,
and the first open declaration of their purposes was
Karl Marx’s Communist Manifesto. It is in this historical trajectory that Welch placed communism,
which he now believed was “only a tool of the total
conspiracy.” After witnessing the successful
takeover of Russia in 1917, the Insiders saw how
powerful communism could be, and how they could
use it in their quest for global dominance. World
War II thus became an Insider-provoked conflict
(Welch claimed that the Communists had “goaded
the unsuspecting Hitler into attacking Poland”)
whose sole purpose was to devastate Europe and
therefore prepare the continent for the spread of
communism. Having conquered much of Europe,
the Insiders now wished to infect the United States
with communism (Epstein and Foster, 118–119).
Such historically inaccurate theories began to
alienate many rank-and-file members, as well as
important conservative leaders and politicians who
had once actively supported the society. As conservative leaders sought to distance themselves from
the “extremist” image of Goldwater and his most
adamant followers, the society saw its influence
374

greatly diminish. The National Review, a previous
ally of the society, rebuked the Birchers in 1965,
and such prominent conservative politicians as
Ronald Reagan began to question the organization’s
opinions and tactics. The American Conservative
Union (ACU), one of the most influential postGoldwater conservative organizations, adopted an
unstated policy barring society members from sitting on the ACU board. The ACU also issued a
statement denying any connection between themselves and the society. Yet despite such developments, the influence of John Birch Society members on U.S. politics should not be overlooked.
Their activity within the society often led them into
other arenas of political activity within their communities and eventually into Republican Party politics. The organizing skills that they brought to the
Goldwater campaign of 1964 helped allow conservative stalwarts to battle with success more moderate Republicans over the shape of the party itself.
Without the grassroots efforts of society members,
the “conservative capture” of U.S. politics—culminating in the election of Reagan in 1980—may have
never even gotten off the ground.
Michael H. Carriere
See also: Anticommunism; Civil Rights Movement;
Cold War; Illuminati; United Nations.
References
Dallek, Matthew. 2000. The Right Moment: Ronald
Reagan’s First Victory and the Decisive Turning
Point in American Politics. New York: The Free
Press.
Epstein, Benjamin R., and Arnold Foster. 1967. The
Radical Right: Report on the John Birch Society
and Its Allies. New York: Random House.
McGirr, Lisa. 2001. Suburban Warriors: The Origins
of the New American Right. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Welch, Robert. 1959. The Blue Book of the John
Birch Society. Belmont, MA: Western Islands.

Johnson, Lyndon Baines
Lyndon Baines Johnson was president from 1963 to
1969. From humble origins, Johnson became first a
congressman, then senator, Senate majority leader,
vice-president, and ultimately president. His presi-

Johnson, Lyndon Baines

dency featured great progress in civil rights and
social programs, but was a strategic disaster. Military
intervention in Vietnam expended vast amounts of
blood and funds, and shattered the popular consensus that previously supported U.S. foreign policy.
Meanwhile, dramatic growth in Soviet military
power, and in German and Japanese economic
strength, challenged U.S. hegemony. The tumultuous events that spanned LBJ’s presidency inspired
many conspiracy theories, which often featured LBJ
controlling events from behind the scenes.
Numerous biographers have described LBJ’s
unpleasant personality: he was grossly crude, profane, vain, greedy, secretive, and ruthless; he flattered superiors and viciously bullied subordinates,
and strove to dominate others and win at any cost.
His relentless womanizing made President Clinton’s
transgressions seem minor. Johnson used his political power to amass a vast personal fortune, using, for
example, his influence over the FCC (Federal Communications Commission) to assure the success of
the radio and TV stations he owned in his wife’s
name. Lobbyists and government contractors purchased advertising time on these stations to secure
LBJ’s favor.
Johnson employed corrupt and illegal political
tactics. In Texas, he bought votes directly and
through local officials, labor unions, and ethnic
political machines. His opponent out-stole him in
1941, but Johnson created enough illegal ballots to
win the 1948 senate race by eighty-seven votes,
earning him the nickname “Landslide Lyndon.” In
1964 and 1968, Johnson instructed the FBI to spy
on both the Democratic National Convention and
the Republican presidential campaigns.
LBJ’s abuses of presidential power greatly exceeded Nixon’s. Johnson used the executive
branch—including the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Central Intelligence Agency, Defense Intelligence Agency, National Security Agency, Internal
Revenue Service, Secret Service, and Army Intelligence—to spy on and harass political opponents,
administration officials, civil rights activists, antiwar
protesters, celebrities, and ordinary citizens.
Conspiracy theorists often cite the above character flaws and criminal acts to support further spec-

Lyndon Baines Johnson. (Library of Congress)

ulation. After all, would not such a profoundly
immoral man be capable of anything? The chief
accusations are that Johnson masterminded the
assassinations of John F. Kennedy, Robert Kennedy,
and Martin Luther King, Jr. Allegedly, only Johnson
had the motive and means to commit these crimes
and to cover up government involvement afterward. LBJ is also accused of escalating the war in
Vietnam on false pretenses, and giving Israel a
“green light” to attack its neighbors.
Johnson’s alleged motives to kill JFK included
simple desire for power and fear that Kennedy
would drop him from the ticket in 1964. Some
believe the assassination resulted from a bitter factional dispute between Kennedy’s northeastern
“doves” and Johnson’s southern “hawks.” These theorists note that after the assassination, Johnson
immediately reversed Kennedy’s policies toward
the Soviet Union, Cuba, and Southeast Asia, and
began aggressively planning for intervention in Vietnam. The assassination occurred on LBJ’s “home
375

Johnson, Lyndon Baines

turf” (Texas), where Johnson’s supposed underworld
connections could easily murder Kennedy and the
patsy, Oswald. Finally, only Johnson, as the new
president, could ensure that the Kennedy autopsy
and the Warren Commission reached the “correct”
conclusion—that is, that Oswald was a lone nut—
and stymie any competing investigations.
Johnson’s alleged motives to kill Robert Kennedy
included personal hatred and fear that he would
reopen the investigation into his brother’s death
(which would lead back to LBJ) once elected. More
importantly, Robert Kennedy threatened Johnson’s
position on Vietnam. Before announcing his candidacy, Kennedy offered Johnson a choice: if LBJ
publicly announced that Vietnam was a mistake, and
appointed Kennedy to a commission to determine a
new strategy, then RFK would not run for president. Otherwise, he would run on an antiwar platform, and presumably would withdraw the U.S.
from Vietnam if elected. The means of assassination
were allegedly a “second gunman” infiltrated into
Kennedy’s bodyguard, with a chemically programmed robot (Sirhan Sirhan) as patsy. Los Angeles Police Department officers with CIA and Army
Intelligence ties purportedly ensured that the investigation was a whitewash and Sirhan was convicted.
Johnson’s motive to kill Martin Luther King, Jr.,
emerged from King’s threat to mobilize a massive
antiwar protest in Washington and shut down the
federal government. The FBI and Army Intelligence had watched King for years, and Army Intelligence had a massive presence in Memphis in April
1968. Conspiracy theorists contend that Johnson
ordered the military to “use every resource” to prevent King’s “invasion” of Washington. An army
sniper team allegedly killed King, and the FBI coordinated the cover-up. Once again, the crime was
pinned on a loner with no apparent motive, deflating talk of a larger conspiracy.
The conspiracy view of U.S. intervention in Vietnam contends that as soon as Johnson took power, he
reversed Kennedy’s policy of gradual disengagement. In 1964, Johnson began to escalate the conflict, and provoked North Vietnam with covert operations in order to secure a pretext for overt
intervention. On 30–31 July, South Vietnamese com376

mandos raided the North Vietnamese coast, and on
2 August, North Vietnam retaliated with a torpedo
boat attack on U.S. destroyers in the Gulf of Tonkin.
The Johnson administration claimed that North
Vietnam attacked again on 4 August, and that these
were “unprovoked” attacks on innocent ships in
international waters. Hanoi accepted responsibility
for the first attack, but charged that the Johnson
administration deliberately faked the second attack
in order to justify escalation (an accusation many
conspiracy theorists accept). Whatever the case,
Congress gave Johnson a “blank check” to intervene
in Vietnam—the “Gulf of Tonkin Resolution”—and
LBJ cashed this check when he sent U.S. combat
troops to Vietnam after the 1964 election.
Conspiracy theorists believe that U.S. support
permitted Israel’s crushing victory in the 1967 Six
Day War. They contend that Johnson met Israeli
Foreign Minister Abba Eban in May 1967, and gave
Israel a “green light” to attack Egypt, Jordan, and
Syria. Israel thereby gained a defensive buffer, and
obtained access to U.S. arms. In return, Johnson
secured the Jewish vote, and gained crucial assistance with his Vietnam problems, because closing
the Suez Canal dramatically reduced the flow of
Soviet weapons and supplies to North Vietnam.
Some believe that the United States provided intelligence to Israel before the war, and that U.S. and
British aircraft participated in the attack.
During the Six Day War, Israel attacked the USS
Liberty, a U.S. intelligence ship in the Mediterranean. Johnson accepted Israel’s apology and explanation that the attack was a mistake. Conspiracy
theorists, however, believe Israel deliberately
attacked the Liberty to prevent the ship from gathering intelligence on Israeli plans to attack Syria, and
that Johnson knew this but hushed it up to protect
Israel. Some even contend that Johnson purposely
denied air cover for the Liberty, because he did not
want U.S. aircraft and Israeli forces embroiled in
combat.
James D. Perry
See also: Kennedy, John F., Assassination of;
Kennedy, Robert F., Assassination of; King,
Martin Luther, Jr., Assassination of; Tonkin Gulf
Incident.

Jonestown

References
Caro, Robert. 1982. The Path to Power. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf.
———. 1990. Means of Ascent. New York: Alfred A.
Knopf.
———. 2002. Master of the Senate. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf.
Ennes, James. 1979. Assault on the Liberty. New
York: Random House.
Green, Stephen. 1988. Taking Sides. Brattleboro,
VT: Amana Books.
Lasky, Victor. 1977. It Didn’t Start with Watergate.
New York: Dial Press.
Melanson, Philip. 1991. The Robert F. Kennedy
Assassination. New York: SPI Books.
Moise, Edwin. 1996. Tonkin Gulf and the Escalation
of the Vietnam War. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press.
Oglesby, Carl. 1976. The Yankee and Cowboy War.
Kansas City, MO: Sheed Andrews and McMeel.
Pepper, William F. 1995. Orders to Kill. New York:
Carroll and Graf.
Pipes, Daniel. 1996. The Hidden Hand: Middle East
Fears of a Conspiracy. New York: St. Martin’s
Press.
Scott, Peter Dale. 1993. Deep Politics and the Death
of JFK. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Zirbel, Craig. 1991. The Texas Connection.
Scottsdale, AZ: Wright and Co.

Jonestown
Jonestown is the name of the settlement in Guyana
founded in the 1970s by the Reverand Jim Jones
and populated by members of his religious commune, the People’s Temple. The name “Jonestown” has come to refer to the 1978 event where
over 900 people died, including Jones himself.
While official accounts maintain that the deaths
were caused by a Jones-led mass suicide, conspiracy accounts argue that most of the dead were
murdered. In conspiracy-theory circles, Jonestown
is an example of a mind-control cult experiment
(with links to the CIA) that went awry.
The official explanation of Jonestown is well
known, having dominated news accounts, massmarket paperbacks, documentaries, and made-fortelevision movies. It states that on 18 November
1978 Jim Jones, the charismatic and fanatical guru
who founded the People’s Temple and established

the religious commune Jonestown, persuaded his
followers to drink cyanide-laced Kool-Aid. Over
900 members did so, and Jones himself died via a
self-inflicted gunshot wound. Around the same
moment, U.S. Congress member Leo Ryan (on an
official investigation mission) and three reporters
were gunned down on the Port Kaituma airstrip as
they tried to leave Jonestown. The assassins did not
die in the “White Night” of mass suicide, but fled
and went into hiding. One of the gunners, Larry
Layton, was later tried and convicted of the murders. The entire event of Jonestown was attributed
to the psychotic leadership of Jones, and engendered general suspicion of idealistic, alternative,
and experimental religious groups.
Mass Suicide or Mass Murder?
Conspiracy accounts challenge this official explanation on two major counts: that most of the members
died by murder rather than suicide, and that Jim
Jones, far from being a lone nut leader, was enmeshed in the shadowy network of intelligence and
mind control. Evidence for the former begins with
the initial news accounts, which listed the suicide
toll at 400, and claimed that 700 had fled into the
jungle. A week later the accounts were revised to
say that 913 people had consumed the poisoned
concoction. Not only did this leave almost 200 people unaccounted for, it indicated a shift in the number of suicides. U.S. military and embassy officials
on the scene first explained the inconsistency by
claiming that the Guyanese people could not count,
that they had missed a pile of bodies (even after
days of searching and counting), and that the discrepancy was due to bodies being stacked on one
another. However, the first photographs from the
scene (150 of them, both aerial and close-up)
showed no stacking. In addition, skeptics find it difficult to believe that 408 bodies (82 of them children) could conceal over 500 others. Instead of this
revised story and number counting, skeptics like
John Judge believe the initial reports that stated
that the majority of Jonestown members fled into
the jungle.
But what happened to them then? C. Leslie
Mootoo, the top Guyanese pathologist, was the first
377

Jonestown

to examine the bodies. He noted that the vast
majority of the dead did not exhibit symptoms of
cyanide poisoning (which include muscular contortions, especially in the face). At the Guyanese grand
jury hearing, Mootoo testified that 80–90 percent of
the victims had fresh needle marks in their shoulder
blades, that a number of others had been shot or
strangled, and that at least 700 had been murdered.
The grand jury, after hearing Mootoo’s testimony
and considering other evidence, concluded that
only two people had committed suicide. In addition, some photos showed gunshot wounds, while
others displayed drag marks leading to the bodies,
indicating that the bodies were moved after death.
Initially, the U.S. Army spokesperson declared
that no autopsies were needed, as the cause of death
was not an issue. While the United States dispatched
large military aircraft for the retrieval of bodies to
the United States, they performed the task slowly.
The bodies were left to decompose in the heat for
almost a week, making autopsies impossible. Relatives and the National Association of Medical Examiners complained that the remains were ineptly handled, often illegally embalmed or cremated, and
nearly impossible to identify. These badly botched
procedures signaled a cover-up for skeptics (since
forensic reconstruction of the White Night could
not be done), further indicating a mass slaughter.
But who performed the killing? A number of theories emerge here. One version is that Jones’s elite
armed guards (about twenty men) hunted the fleeing members. These guards were an all-white group
who had special privileges during the Jonestown
stay (90 percent of the dead were women and 80
percent were black). Some of these armed guards
were responsible for gunning down Congressperson Leo Ryan and the reporters on the airstrip. Witnesses and survivors describe the killers as glassyeyed “zombies” and their killing as mechanical and
methodical. Most of these armed guards escaped
and are still unaccounted for. Other theories implicate U.S. Green Berets who were in Guyana at the
time, as well as British Black Watch troops also
training in the region. Guyanese troops and police
(some of whom were on the scene of the Ryan

378

killings but did very little to defend them) have also
been implicated.
Jim Jones’s fate has also come under suspicion.
While the official story maintains that he committed suicide, conspiracy theories point to the fact
that the gun allegedly used was found some 200
feet away from the body. Photos of Jones’s body do
not show his identifying tattoos. The FBI examined
Jones’s fingerprints twice (highly unusual for what is
supposed to be an exact science), while his dental
records were never checked.
Putting all of these pieces together, the conspiracy theory argues that what happened on 18
November 1978 was a mass murder, put into action
because of Congress member Ryan’s investigative
findings that uncovered the true nature of the People’s Temple.
Messianic Cult, Government
Mind-Control Experiment, or Both?
Beyond the events of that day, however, conspiracy
theorists also place Jonestown in a larger context,
implicating the very nature of the religious commune into the shadowy world of intelligence. In a
tape recording made during the White Night, Jim
Jones is heard yelling, “Get Dwyer out of here!” He
was referring to Richard Dwyer, who was working
as deputy chief of mission for the U.S. Embassy in
Guyana. Dwyer was listed in the publication Who’s
Who in the CIA, and was allegedly an agent since
1959. He was found at the airstrip where Ryan and
the others were killed, stripping the dead of their
belongings. Other embassy members, some of them
close to Jones, were also involved in intelligence
work. Jones’s childhood friend Dan Mitrione joined
the CIA-financed International Police Academy.
Mitrione was a police advisor in Brazil during
Jones’s ministering there in the early 1960s, where
neighbors found Jones’s wealthy lifestyle to be suspicious (he claimed he was getting paid by the U.S.
government). Jones’s early work in founding the
People’s Temple in 1965 in Ukiah, California, his
moving of the church to San Francisco (where supporters Mayor Miscone and Harvey Milk were later
mysteriously killed), and his eventual relocation to

Jonestown

Guyana were all implicated in mysterious deaths,
large financial dealings, and illegal activities. Most
of Jones’s wealth (estimated at between $26 million
and $2 billion) disappeared after the mass death.
According to survivors and ex-members, Jonestown was anything but the socialist utopia or religious
commune its self-promotional literature claimed.
These survivors described the organization as a cult,
complete with routine harassment, forced labor, and
torture (including repeated “White Night” drills).
After the collective death, investigators discovered a
massive cache of drugs, with large quantities of thorazine, sodium pentathol, and numerous other tranquilizers and psychotropic drugs used in the CIA’s
MK-ULTRA behavioral modification experiments.
A number of survivors ended up with mysterious
fates even after they avoided the gruesome “White
Night.” Former Jones aide Michael Prokes held a
press conference where he accused the U.S. authorities of hiding an audiotape of the massacre. After
meeting the press, Prokes went to the bathroom and
allegedly killed himself. Jeannie and Al Mills, who
planned on writing an exposé of Jones, were found
murdered in their home. Yet another former member was involved in the 1984 mass murder of Los
Angeles school children.
In 1980 the U.S. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence found no evidence of CIA
activity in Jonestown. A year before, based on many
of the discrepancies, sinister links, and evidence
around Jonestown, former Ryan aide Joseph Holsinger came to the conclusion that sums up the
Jonestown conspiracy theory. He argued that Jonestown was a mass mind-control experiment with CIA
involvement, in which MK-ULTRA techniques (officially halted in 1973) were transferred from institutions to religious groups. Holsinger also argued that
Ryan’s congressional investigation found incriminat-

ing evidence of this experiment, and that Ryan and
the 900 members of the People’s Temple were murdered to prevent exposure.
Jack Z. Bratich
See also: African Americans; Central
Intelligence Agency; Mind Control; MK-ULTRA;
Waco.
References
Chidester, David. 1988. Salvation and Suicide: An
Interpretation of Jim Jones, the People’s Temple,
and Jonestown. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press.
Hall, John R. 1987. Gone from the Promised Land:
Jonestown in American Cultural History. New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.
Judge, John.1993. “The Black Hole of Guyana.” Pp.
127–165 in Secret and Suppressed: Banned Ideas
and Hidden History, ed. Jim Keith. Portland, OR:
Feral House.
Kidulff, Marshall, and Ron Javers. 1978. Suicide
Cult: The Inside Story of the People’s Temple Sect
and the Massacre in Guyana. New York: Bantam
Books.
Klineman, George, Sherman Butler, and David
Conn. 1980. The Cult that Died: The Tragedy of
Jim Jones and the People’s Temple. New York:
Putnam.
Layton, Deborah. 1998. Seductive Poison: A
Jonestown Survivor’s Story of Life and Death in
the People’s Temple. New York: Anchor
Books/Doubleday.
U.S. House Committee on Foreign Affairs. 1979.
The Death of Representative Leo J. Ryan, People’s
Temple and Jonestown. Understanding a Tragedy.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Vankin, Jonathan. 1991. Conspiracies, Cover-ups,
and Crimes. New York: Paragon House.
Vankin, Jonathan, and John Whalen. 1998. The 70
Greatest Conspiracy Theories. New York: Citadel
Press.
Wooden, Kenneth. 1980. The Children of
Jonestown. New York: McGraw-Hill.

379

K
KAL 007
On 1 September 1983, a Soviet fighter shot down
Korean Air Lines flight 007 (KAL 007) near Sakhalin
Island, killing 269 people. The Reagan administration insisted that the Soviets deliberately destroyed
an innocent civilian airliner while the Soviets
asserted that the 747 was on a spy mission. Since
then, the debate over whether there was some form
of conspiracy or cover-up has blossomed, with some
attempting to explain how KAL 007 could have accidentally wandered astray, while others argue that
U.S. intelligence agencies used KAL 007 to probe
Soviet air defenses.
KAL 007 initially flew from New York to Anchorage without incident. The pilot and copilot were
élite former military aviators with a combined
10,000+ hours flying 747s, and the pilot had been
nominated to fly South Korea’s presidential aircraft.
However, an hour after departing Anchorage, the
flight was already twelve miles north of its first
checkpoint on the route to Seoul. KAL 007 gave
false position reports at the first four checkpoints,
reporting that it was on course when it was actually
many miles off course. The 747 flew over the Kamchatka Peninsula—site of many strategic installations—for 38 minutes, but somehow eluded fighter
interception and entered the Sea of Okhotsk. Just
before Sakhalin Island, 007 turned northwest—
directly toward the Soviet mainland. Over Sakhalin,
Soviet fighters tried to force the plane to land, but
007 took evasive action, altering course and altitude, and finally entering the Sea of Japan heading

southwest. A fighter fired two air-to-air missiles,
and at least one struck 007, which descended
32,000 feet in 12 minutes and disappeared from
Japanese radar screens.
The shootdown had remarkable political effects.
Before the shootdown, the Reagan administration
planned to deploy Cruise and Pershing II missiles to
Europe, but congressional Democrats and European allies strongly opposed this decision. Congress
also opposed the administration’s favorite military
programs. Cold war tensions were easing before the
incident, due to surprising new Soviet initiatives on
arms control, grain purchases, and human rights. On
26 August, Yuri Andropov made an unprecedented
offer to eliminate Soviet SS-20 missiles if the United
States renounced its missile deployments. After the
shootdown, the incipient U.S.-Soviet rapprochement was aborted, Reagan’s defense programs sailed
through Congress, and U.S. missiles were deployed
on schedule and with minimal opposition. Many
observers noted that the shootdown benefited the
hawks in Washington and Moscow.
Seymour Hersh claims that due to a series of
highly improbable errors, 007 got lost and the crew
failed to notice. The U.S military saw Soviet
defenses react to 007, but did not understand why
the Soviets were alerted, and the Soviets simply
“screwed up” when they shot down the plane. In
short, no conspiracy.
Gollin and Allardyce rebut in detail the only two
plausible explanations for 007 accidentally getting
lost—that the inertial navigation system or the auto381

KAL 007

pilot was incorrectly programmed. They show that
007’s behavior was inconsistent with accident, but
unlike other authors, do not attribute this to a conspiracy involving U.S. intelligence.
KAL 007 and U.S. Intelligence
KAL conspiracy theorists note that during the cold
war, U.S. intelligence focused intently on the Soviet
Far East. Intelligence sought to find vulnerabilities
in Soviet defenses and constantly watched for Soviet
submarine and bomber activity that might presage a
nuclear attack. Listening posts in Alaska and Japan,
reconnaissance aircraft like the RC-135, and “ferret”
satellites intercepted Soviet radar, communications,
and electronic transmissions. U.S. aircraft regularly
intruded on Soviet airspace in order to activate,
locate, and analyze enemy defenses. Many aircraft
were shot down on such missions, and therefore
U.S. intelligence closely monitored Soviet fighters,
many of which were launched when KAL 007
intruded. U.S. intelligence should have been especially alert that night, because the Soviets allegedly
planned to launch a new ballistic missile toward the
Kamchatka testing ground. An RC-135 aircraft and
the radar ship USS Observation Island patrolled
near Kamchatka to track the missile and monitor
missile telemetry and other communications.
David Pearson contends that U.S. radars would
have tracked 007, and U.S. intelligence would have
noticed Soviet radars tracking 007. Military procedure required notifying air traffic control in such
cases—yet this did not occur. Pearson cannot
believe those who claim that U.S. intelligence did
not gather data on 007, or misunderstood the data,
or analyzed the data too late.
R. W. Johnson and others argue that 007 deliberately intruded on Soviet airspace, and that the U.S.
military did not notify air traffic control about 007
because they wanted to observe the Soviet response.
Johnson links the intrusion to U.S. discovery, in June
1983, of a large new Soviet radar in Krasnoyarsk,
Siberia. This radar might violate the 1972 AntiBallistic Missile (ABM) Treaty and signify Soviet
intent to build an ABM system, but the only way to
discover this was to “light up” the whole air defense
system with an intruder. Johnson theorizes that U.S.
382

aircraft used electronic warfare to blind Soviet
radars and enable 007 to penetrate the defenses.
Electronic warfare confused the Soviets about
whether 007 was military or civilian, and the Soviets
alerted their entire system. Meanwhile, U.S. reconnaissance assets—including a “ferret” satellite and
the Space Shuttle—were perfectly positioned to
harvest much intelligence from the alert. Johnson
considers that U.S. planners never expected the
Soviets to shoot down the plane. The shootdown
forced the Reagan administration to conceal their
responsibility while blasting the Soviets in the court
of public opinion.
Michel Brun rearranges the evidence to reach a
bizarre conclusion. He argues that 007 stumbled
across a U.S.-Soviet air battle over Sakhalin, in
which over ten U.S. military aircraft were downed.
KAL 007 escaped this dogfight, only to be shot
down near Honshu by “friendly fire” from Japanese
or Americans who mistook 007 for a Soviet bomber.
A subgenre of KAL conspiracy theory is the argument that 007 landed on Sakhalin or ditched safely
at sea and the Soviets imprisoned or executed the
survivors. These theories claim that 007 was not
blown apart in midair, but descended slowly for
twelve minutes, which indicates the plane was airworthy and under control. The vast quantities of
debris, bodies, and luggage recovered from other
747 midair explosions were not found near Sakhalin,
and nothing from the cargo compartment ever surfaced. Thus, 007 must have landed or ditched intact.
Some ultraconservatives contend that the Soviets
lured 007 off course in order to kill a single passenger, the staunchly anticommunist John Birch Society
chairman, Larry McDonald, and that he—and other
survivors—languish in Russian prisons even today.
KAL conspiracy theories generally reflect their
authors’ political predispositions. Right-wing theories echo the U.S. government position in 1983: the
flight was innocently astray, U.S. intelligence was
uninvolved, and the Soviets wantonly murdered
civilians. Left-wing theories echo the Soviet position
in 1983: the flight was an intelligence probe, and the
U.S. government behaved just as dishonestly as the
Soviet government. Each side accuses the other of
imbecilic credulity. “Rightists” contend that the

Kennedy, John F., Assassination of

belief that the Reagan administration would risk
innocent lives on an intelligence mission is a product
of Soviet disinformation and that furthermore, so
many people would have known about any such mission that something would have leaked. “Leftists”
insist that “accident theories” demand accepting too
many highly improbable events at once and they
consider proponents of such theories to be tools of
the Reagan administration’s cover-up.
James D. Perry
See also: Pan Am Flight 103; TWA Flight 800.
References
Brun, Michel. 1995. Incident at Sakhalin. New York:
Four Walls Eight Windows.
Gollin, James, and Robert Allardyce. 1994. Desired
Track. Findlay, OH: American Vision Publishing.
Hersh, Seymour. 1986. “The Target Is Destroyed.”
New York: Random House.
Johnson, R. W. 1986. Shootdown. New York: Viking.
Pearson, David. 1987. KAL 007: Cover-Up. New
York: Summit.

Kennedy, John F., Assassination of
The Kennedy assassination has become known as
the “mother of all conspiracy theories.” With the
possible exception of Pearl Harbor, no other event
in U.S. history has excited so much controversy,
with literally hundreds of books—and Oliver
Stone’s popular movie JFK—devoted to every detail
of the assassination and its aftermath. The assassination created bitter disputes between conspiracy
theorists (hereafter “critics”) and Warren Commission supporters (hereafter “loyalists”). Critics and
loyalists accused each other of naivete, cynicism,
and selective interpretation of the evidence. The
rising popularity of the conspiracy view generally
reflected the increasing skepticism in U.S. society.
Just after the assassination, “conspiracy buffs” were
regarded as harmless fruitcakes, but by the early
1990s—after Vietnam, Watergate, revelations of
CIA assassination plots, and Iran-Contra—opinion
polls revealed that most Americans rejected the
Warren Commission version of events. Critics disagreed on the exact nature of the “real conspiracy,”
since many organizations and individuals had plau-

sible motives to kill Kennedy. Most theories focused
on Lyndon B. Johnson, the CIA, the Mafia, and the
anti-Castro Cubans, but all agreed that a “lone nut”
(i.e., Lee Harvey Oswald) did not kill JFK.
The Establishment View
John F. Kennedy barely won Texas in 1960, and
needed to raise money and build popular support
there before the 1964 election. He flew to Texas in
1963 with Vice-President Johnson, and landed in
Dallas on 22 November. Dallas seethed with rightwing hate, but JFK and Jackie Kennedy nevertheless chose to ride in an open limousine with Governor John Connally and his wife Nellie. LBJ, Lady
Bird Johnson, and Senator Ralph Yarborough followed in another open limousine. The rest of the
motorcade conveyed security, press, staff members,
and local dignitaries. At 12:29 P.M., the motorcade
entered Dealey Plaza, and turned right onto Houston Street, heading toward the Texas School Book
Depository (TSBD). The presidential limousine
slowed down to negotiate the tight (120-degree) left
turn onto Elm Street in front of the TSBD. The
vehicle then headed away from the TSBD, and
began driving toward the “Triple Underpass”
(where Elm, Main, and Commerce Streets passed
under a railroad bridge). A “Grassy Knoll” lay ahead
and to the right of the vehicle, and behind the fence
on the Grassy Knoll was a parking lot and railroad
yard. Lee Harvey Oswald fired three shots from the
sixth floor of the TSBD with a bolt-action Italian
rifle: one struck Kennedy in the back, which exited
through his throat and then struck Connally, one
struck Kennedy in the back of the head, killing him,
and another shot missed. The limousine drove to
Parkland Hospital, where doctors pronounced
Kennedy dead. The body was taken aboard Air
Force One to Bethesda Naval Hospital for autopsy.
Shortly after the assassination, Oswald was
arrested after shooting a police officer, J. D. Tippit,
who tried to question him. Oswald was charged with
the murder of Kennedy and Tippit. Two days later, a
local nightclub owner, Jack Ruby, fatally shot Oswald
in the basement of Police Headquarters. On 29
November, President Johnson summoned Chief
Justice Earl Warren to preside over a distinguished
383

Kennedy, John F., Assassination of

panel charged with investigating the assassination.
Johnson ordered the Warren Commission (hereafter
WC) to complete its work before the 1964 national
political conventions, and the WC issued an 888page report in September 1964. The report incorporated the accounts of hundreds of witnesses and
such material evidence as a movie taken by a spectator, Abraham Zapruder. The WC concluded that
Oswald alone killed Kennedy, that his motives were
frustration and personal failure, that he had no connection to the U.S. or foreign governments, and that
he had no connection to Ruby.
Reaction to the Warren Commission
WC conclusions were widely accepted, at least temporarily, but soon critics would challenge WC evidence, methods, conclusions, and even the integrity
of its members. Even loyalists conceded that its
work had certain shortcomings. The WC worked
very quickly, and relied uncritically on the FBI and
CIA to conduct the actual investigation. They did
not have access to autopsy photos or x-rays, and did
not consult forensic experts. They assumed from
the outset that Oswald acted alone, subordinated all
evidence to this preconceived theory, and ignored
or disparaged evidence or witnesses that contradicted this theory.
Some critics considered the WC nothing less than
a whitewash designed to obscure the truth, protect
LBJ politically, and neutralize any potential competing investigations. The FBI allegedly manipulated
the WC in order to suppress evidence that Oswald
was an FBI informant or was under FBI surveillance, and that the FBI was aware of the assassination plot but failed to warn the president. They also
thought the FBI concealed Ruby’s extensive Mafia
connections, and that the CIA and the FBI withheld
evidence that linked Oswald to Soviet and Cuban
intelligence. Some critics believed that the original
purpose of the assassination was to frame Cuba as a
pretext for U.S. invasion, and thus the conspirators
had built a plausible trail (sometimes using “Oswald
doubles”) linking Oswald to communism. When
LBJ decided for unknown reasons not to invade
Cuba after the assassination, all this evidence
needed to be hidden from the WC.
384

What Happened in Dealey Plaza?
Many critics focused on errors, omissions, and
inconsistencies in the WC account of the events in
Dealey Plaza. Critics considered that certain people
in or near the plaza behaved suspiciously, and that
physical evidence and eyewitness testimony called
into question the WC theory of the assassination.
A successful assassination necessarily involves a
failure of protection, but some regarded Secret Service performance in Dallas as either culpably negligent or downright suspicious. Secret Service men
failed to act on information in their possession concerning sniper threats to the president in Dallas,
permitted the president to take a dangerous route,
failed to close all windows and manholes along the
route, and failed to ride on the limousine. They also
reduced the number of police motorcycle and automobile escorts in the motorcade, and stayed up late
drinking the night before the assassination. Agents
reacted sluggishly throughout the attack, and the
limousine driver even slowed down and looked
behind him until the fatal shot struck Kennedy. One
author argued that after Oswald’s first shot, a Secret
Service agent in the following car accidentally shot
Kennedy in the back of the head with an AR-15.
Some witnesses claimed that men with Secret Service identification warned them away from the
Grassy Knoll area before and after the assassination,
but the Secret Service insisted that no agents were
in this location. Did these “bogus agents” enable
the Grassy Knoll shooter(s) to enter and leave the
area undisturbed, or were the “agents” really Dallas
plainclothes detectives?
Critics chastised the WC for failing to investigate
the possibly sinister behavior of certain individuals in
and around Dealey Plaza. For example, a man in the
plaza opened and closed his umbrella as the shots
began, and some speculated he was signaling to the
assassins or firing a paralyzing dart into Kennedy’s
neck. Another man seemed to make hand signals
and speak (to hidden gunmen?) into a walkie-talkie
as Kennedy approached. Just before the assassination, a man collapsed in front of the TSBD, perhaps
to distract police and public attention as the assassins
moved into position. Just after the assassination, Dallas police arrested “three tramps” in a railway car

Kennedy, John F., Assassination of

behind the plaza, and somehow lost their arrest
records after releasing them. Critics obsessively
scrutinized photographs of the tramps, and argued
that the tramps were really Mafia hitmen or the
same CIA team later responsible for the Watergate
burglary. Subsequent investigations found innocent
explanations for the Umbrella Man, the “distracting
seizure,” and the three tramps, but critics disparaged
this evidence.
The Zapruder Film
The Zapruder film created vexing problems for the
WC and is probably the strongest objective evidence
for conspiracy. The film frames provided a clock that
established the exact sequence of events in the
plaza, and the reactions of the victims and the forensic evidence are difficult to reconcile with the WC
interpretation. The FBI claimed that the minimum
firing time for the murder weapon was 2.3 seconds,
or 42 film frames, yet the WC found that both
Kennedy and Connally were hit within a 30-frame
time span. Thus, either the same bullet hit both
men, or there were two gunmen. The WC chose the
former explanation, the so-called “single-bullet theory.” The single bullet purportedly struck Kennedy
in the back of the neck, exited through his throat,
then entered Connally’s back near his right armpit,
exited below his nipple, shattered his wrist, and
wounded his thigh. Critics insisted that Connally did
not react for ten frames after Kennedy was visibly
hit, so they couldn’t have been hit with the same bullet. The WC rather unconvincingly concluded that
Connally suffered from a “delayed reaction” to his
extensive wounds. Critics questioned WC assumptions on seating alignment and trajectory, and contended that Kennedy and Connally were seated
such that the same bullet could not have passed
through both men.
Critics and loyalists alike meticulously analyzed
the frames of the Zapruder film that showed
Kennedy’s head and body at the fatal moment, and
argued fiercely over the results. The film showed
Kennedy jerking violently back and to the left in
reaction to the fatal shot, and most viewers believed
this obviously indicated a gunman on the Grassy
Knoll (to the right front of the limousine). Loyalists

claimed that “neuromuscular spasms” or a jet of
brain tissue flying from the front of Kennedy’s head
caused his body to fly backwards after he was shot
from behind. Most viewers found this counterintuitive if not totally implausible.
The Zapruder film was vastly important, and thus
unsurprisingly was itself the subject of conspiracy
theories. Suspicions were heightened because the
film was not available to the public for many years,
and supposedly the CIA had access to the film
within days of the assassination.
Critics cited anomalies within the film, and apparent disagreements between the film, eyewitnesses,
other photographs, and reenactments, as evidence of
tampering. Some critics seemed to interpret the film
most selectively, accepting the parts of the film that
supported their views and rejecting those that did
not. Yet, if the CIA could perform a complex editing
task on short notice, why did they not make the film
completely support the lone gunman theory?
Eyewitness Testimony
Many people in Dealey Plaza witnessed things
apparently inconsistent with the WC version of
events. Some witnesses claimed to have seen strange
men with rifles on the Grassy Knoll and Triple
Underpass before the assassination. Many witnesses,
including police officers, thought the shots came
from the Grassy Knoll, and surged forward to investigate. Some witnesses believed they saw a puff of
smoke on the Grassy Knoll and a man fleeing the
scene. Some critics asserted that this man could be
seen behind the wall on the Grassy Knoll in photographs taken during the assassination. Two motorcycle officers behind the limousine were splattered
with blood and gore, consistent with a shot from the
right front exiting to the left rear. A bullet fragment
slightly wounded James Tague near the Triple
Underpass, but the WC could not “conclusively”
match this bullet to any of the three Oswald supposedly fired. The WC speculated that the fragment
came from the first or second shot, but critics
doubted that a mere fragment could travel so far and
strike with such force.
Some testimony from TSBD employees raised
questions about the WC version of events. One
385

Kennedy, John F., Assassination of

employee noted that on the morning of the assassination, Oswald did not know why people were gathering outside, and seemed unaware the motorcade
was coming. A secretary saw him in the first floor
break room at 12:15, although the WC insisted he
went to the sixth floor at 11:55 and stayed there. A
photograph taken when the shots erupted appeared
to some to show Oswald standing in the TSBD
doorway. Less than ninety seconds after the final
shot, a policeman with a drawn pistol encountered
Oswald calmly drinking a Coke on the first floor.
Oswald managed the encounter with remarkable
aplomb for a man who had supposedly just shot the
president, and the policeman departed. Did
Oswald race down six flights of stairs only to pause
for refreshment? Or was he not on the sixth floor at
12:30? Several witnesses claimed they saw two or
three armed men on the sixth floor at 12:15.
Even moderate readers considered that WC
treatment of witnesses was incomplete and selective. In their rush to judgment, the WC ignored
many important witnesses, and disparaged—or tried
to intimidate—witnesses who suggested that
Oswald did not fire three shots from the sixth floor
of the TSBD. Critics maintained that the WC deliberately avoided and suppressed testimony that contradicted their preconceived theory. Loyalists simply
noted that eyewitness testimony was notoriously
unreliable and that human memory was fallible and
easily influenced after the fact.
Kennedy’s Wounds: Parkland Testimony
Doctors at Parkland Hospital had great experience
with gunshot wounds, and saw the president and
Connally immediately after they were shot. Their
testimony on his wounds should thus carry great
weight. On arrival, Kennedy was unconscious, with
fixed dilated pupils, a gray pallor, and slow, uncoordinated breathing. He was clearly dying, but the
doctors did what they could. They cut away his
clothes, and made a small incision to enlarge the
throat wound and insert an endotracheal tube. They
administered fluids and oxygen and began a chest
massage, but to no avail. Kennedy was officially pronounced dead, and placed in a casket. An unseemly
altercation developed between Texas officials,
386

whom Texas law required to conduct Kennedy’s
autopsy, and armed federal agents, whom Johnson
had ordered to take the body to Washington. Federal guns superseded Texas laws, and the casket was
taken to Air Force One, where Johnson was sworn
in as president.
Several developments at Parkland fueled conspiracy theories. In particular, the wounds described at
Parkland did not match the autopsy reports and
photographs later made in Bethesda. At a press conference just after Kennedy’s death, Doctor Perry
stated that the throat wound was an entrance
wound, and he and other Parkland doctors repeated
this claim in subsequent interviews and testimony.
Doctors’ statements written the afternoon of the
assassination reported gunshot wounds to Kennedy’s
temple and a large, gaping wound in the back of the
head from which cerebellar tissue extruded. Parkland doctors did not observe a wound in Kennedy’s
back, nor did they find a small entry wound high on
the back of the head. Hospital staff found a bullet on
an unattended stretcher, and the WC asserted that
this bullet passed through Kennedy, lodged in Connally’s thigh, and later fell out onto the stretcher.
Critics doubted that this stretcher was really Connally’s, and suspected the bullet was planted or that
another bullet was later substituted. Critics noted
that the bullet was nearly intact (or “pristine”)
despite having passed through two men, smashing
numerous bones in the process. Only a high-velocity
bullet could pass through two bodies in accordance
with the “single bullet theory,” but only a lowvelocity bullet could remain pristine—a clear contradiction. Critics further contended that the weight
of fragments recovered from Connally’s body and
remaining inside him exceeded the weight lost by
the pristine bullet.
Kennedy’s Wounds: Bethesda Testimony
Kennedy’s autopsy was undeniably mishandled.
The doctors at Bethesda were clinical, not forensic,
pathologists, and had little experience with gunshot
wounds. They conducted the autopsy amidst an
intimidating crowd of senior officers, FBI, and
Secret Service agents. Robert and Jackie Kennedy
were in the hospital, and kept pressuring the doc-

Kennedy, John F., Assassination of

tors to finish the autopsy. An autopsy that might
have taken three days was concluded in three hours,
and the doctors neglected many essential procedures. They failed to consult the Parkland doctors
beforehand to discuss the case. They did not examine the clothing to establish whether or not the
clothing holes were consistent with the wounds.
They did not track the bullet path from Kennedy’s
back through the body to determine the exit point.
Indeed, they were entirely unaware of the throat
wound until the next day, when it was too late to
reexamine the body. They failed to shave the head
for a clear view of its wounds, or to section the brain
to establish the path of the fatal bullet. They did not
examine all of the internal organs. Doctor Humes
burned his draft autopsy notes and draft autopsy
report, and wrote his final report from memory,
without access to photographs or x-rays. Given this
slapdash performance, conspiracy speculation was
almost inevitable.
The first source of controversy was the location
of the back wound. If Oswald fired downward from
the sixth floor, then the back entry wound had to be
higher than the throat exit wound. Numerous credible witnesses testified that the back wound was
much lower—some 5–6 inches below the neckline—than the throat wound. Such a back wound
was consistent with the bullet holes in Kennedy’s
jacket and shirt, and with the autopsy “face sheet”
(a drawing made at the autopsy and verified by
Kennedy’s personal physician). However, any shot
that entered there and exited through the throat
had to be traveling upward, not downward. Critics
doubted the WC explanation that Kennedy’s suit
and shirt were bunched up, and thus the bullet
entered much higher than the clothes seemed to
indicate. Humes did not dissect the bullet’s track—
he only probed the wound, and found it a few
inches deep. He did not use autopsy photographs to
establish the wound’s exact location when writing
his final report. Despite the evidence to the contrary, the WC concluded that Kennedy’s wound was
at the “back of his neck.”
The head wound created further controversy,
because the testimony of Parkland and Bethesda
doctors disagreed on important points. A Parkland

doctor (Carrico) described a 5–7cm hole in the
“right occipitoparietal” area, but at Bethesda,
Humes said the hole was much larger (13cm) and
located higher (“involving chiefly the parietal bone
but extending somewhat into the temporal and
occipital regions”). Parkland doctors testified that
cerebellar tissue was visible, whereas the Bethesda
doctors observed cerebral tissue (the cerebellum is
located lower than the cerebrum and looks quite different). Bethesda doctors said the scalp was “absent”
over the wound, but Parkland doctors said the scalp
was present. Bethesda doctors found a small occipital wound that the Parkland doctors did not observe,
and the autopsy concluded that the bullet entered
through this wound and exited through the large
parietal wound.
Critic David Lifton accounted for these discrepancies with an elaborate theory that unknown individuals stole Kennedy’s body from the coffin in Dallas, and secretly altered the corpse. The pre-autopsy
surgery “reversed the trajectories” (i.e., made evidence of a front shot seem like evidence of a rear
shot). Lifton considered that the Bethesda doctors
were honest, but were deceived. Such a complex
effort clearly required considerable planning and
the cooperation of Secret Service and Navy personnel. Loyalists simply asserted that Kennedy’s casket
was never unattended on Air Force One, as Lifton
claimed.
Lifton and other critics regarded the autopsy
photographs and x-rays with great suspicion. The
WC deemed the photographs and x-rays too “morbid” to include in the report—indeed, the WC did
not even examine them—but allowed a medical
artist who had not seen the body to create drawings
of the wounds. Critics noted that these drawings
were inconsistent with photographic and eyewitness testimony, and wondered what the WC was
hiding. When autopsy photographs were finally released, critics claimed that they did not match the
observations of Parkland doctors. For example, they
argued that in the frontal photo, the throat wound
was a large gash rather than the neat incision created at Parkland. They claimed that in photos of
Kennedy’s back, a ruler was placed over the “real”
(low) entry wound, and that in photos of the back of
387

Kennedy, John F., Assassination of

the head, no massive occipital wound was evident.
They also contended that the skull x-rays showed
extensive damage that was not visible in the photographs. Loyalists countered that various experts
considered the photographs and x-rays authentic
and consistent with two shots from the rear, and
thus the Parkland doctors must have been mistaken
in their observations.
Further suspicion centered on the disposition of
autopsy materials. During the autopsy, doctors made
slides of blood smears and took tissue specimens
from the wounds. They also preserved the brain in
formalin. They placed these materials in a footlocker
and transferred them to the National Archives,
where they subsequently disappeared. Critics found
speculation that Robert Kennedy disposed of them
to prevent their public display unconvincing. If RFK
wanted to prevent an unseemly spectacle, why not
destroy the far more sensational photographs and
x-rays?
Who Was Oswald?
The WC went to great lengths to prove that Oswald
had the motive, means, and opportunity to kill JFK,
and that he did so alone. The WC Report was
widely regarded as the “prosecutor’s brief against
Oswald” should the case have come to trial. Critics
took the defending lawyer’s role. They delved into
every detail of Oswald’s life, and pointed out errors,
omissions, and questionable assumptions in the
prosecution’s case.
Oswald’s background was unusual: as an enlisted
Marine radio operator, he was stationed at the Japanese base from which U-2 aircraft flew secret missions over Russia and China. He developed an interest in communism, and taught himself Russian.
After leaving the Marines, he declared himself a
Communist and defected to the Soviet Union. He
lived in Minsk for a time, and married a Russian
woman, Marina. He left Minsk in 1962, and lived in
Dallas and New Orleans. In New Orleans, he started
a pro-Castro organization, and then traveled to the
Soviet and Cuban embassies in Mexico City in an
unsuccessful effort to enter Cuba. Despite all this,
the WC insisted that Oswald had no relationship
with the FBI or CIA. He got a job at the TSBD, and
388

when he heard the president would pass the TSBD,
he smuggled his rifle into the building and constructed a “sniper’s nest” of book boxes. After shooting JFK, he walked toward his home, but Officer
Tippit stopped him for questioning en route. He
shot Tippit, ducked into a movie theater, and was
there arrested. Police and federal agents interrogated him and tested him for gunpowder residue.
Police were transferring Oswald to the County Jail
when nightclub owner Jack Ruby shot him fatally.
Mole or Marxist?
Critics were highly skeptical that Oswald had no
connection to U.S. intelligence. Oswald was a
marine with security clearance working in a sensitive
installation, yet he acted like an ardent Communist.
He learned Russian, subscribed to pro-Soviet literature, associated with Japanese Communists, and frequented expensive nightclubs. Somehow, all this
failed to alarm U.S. military counterintelligence.
Critics speculated that this lack of interest was deliberate: Oswald was a “spy in training” who was building a “leftist” cover story because U.S. intelligence
planned to infiltrate him into Russia in the guise of
a defector. Some believed his Russian skills dramatically improved because he attended the elite
Defense Language Institute in Monterey, California. Critics considered that Oswald gained a hardship discharge and was issued a passport with suspicious ease. Further, they questioned how Oswald
could have paid for a $1,500 trip to Russia when his
bank account contained only $203.
Oswald’s defection to Russia should have
sounded many alarms. In the U.S. Embassy in
Moscow, he announced his intention to renounce
his citizenship and reveal military secrets to the
Soviets. Strangely, the CIA did not open a file on
Oswald for over a year, but only placed him on a list
of people whose mail was secretly opened. The FBI
opened a counterintelligence file, but took no
action other than to watch for signs of his return to
the United States under another name. U.S. intelligence apparently did not assess whether Oswald’s
defection could compromise the U-2 program, even
though his knowledge might have been useful to
the Soviets.

Kennedy, John F., Assassination of

Oswald returned to the United States in early
1962, though not all the details of his trip are
known, and the State Department facilitated his
journey. They returned his passport quickly, made
no difficulties about his citizenship, exempted his
wife from immigration restrictions, and loaned him
money. Oswald should have interested U.S. intelligence: did he give military secrets to the Soviets
that enabled them to shoot down a U-2 in May
1960? What, if anything, did the KGB ask him after
he defected? Were he and his wife Soviet spies?
What did he observe in Russia? The FBI interviewed him three weeks after his return, and found
Oswald truculent and evasive. He refused to take a
polygraph test, said he might return to the Soviet
Union, and immediately subscribed to leftist periodicals. Astonishingly, the FBI nonetheless
declared Oswald “unworthy” of further interest,
and closed his file. Similarly, the CIA supposedly
chose not to interview him, and did not even obtain
transcripts of all the FBI interviews.
Critics argued that Oswald was a U.S. intelligence agent—one of many “fake defectors” sent to
Russia at that time. Although the precise purpose of
the “fake defection” remained speculative, these
authors considered that this explained Oswald’s
strange behavior and the U.S. government’s favorable treatment of him. Loyalists denied that Oswald
received special treatment, and asserted that when
the intelligence agencies ignored Oswald, they were
bungling, not protecting their asset. The question of
whether Oswald was a Marxist or a mole in Russia
was chiefly important in that he displayed a similar
pattern of ambiguous behavior after he returned to
the United States.
Strange Friendship
In Dallas in late 1962, Oswald befriended George de
Mohrenschildt, a wealthy émigré Russian aristocrat
and oil geologist. He was thirty years older than
Oswald, far more sophisticated, and a staunch anticommunist. Why did this man waste his time with a
callow, penniless, Marxist loser? Whatever the reason, he found Oswald a job and clearly exerted a
major influence over him. De Mohrenschildt had
CIA contacts, and was a close friend of the CIA’s

Domestic Contacts Division chief in Dallas. Critics
speculated that de Mohrenschildt controlled
Oswald, debriefed him on his experiences in Russia,
and reported the results to this (or some other) CIA
contact. Was de Mohrenschildt’s friendship with
Oswald sinister? Or was it a casual lark for a bored
aristocrat? De Mohrenschildt later testified that
Oswald told him he had shot at a Dallas right-winger.
De Mohrenschildt and his wife were the only people, other than Marina, who actually saw the assassination rifle in Oswald’s possession. Critics find this
testimony—which confirmed Oswald’s murderous
proclivities to the WC—suspiciously convenient, in
view of de Mohrenschildt’s CIA connections.
Oswald in New Orleans
In April 1963, Oswald moved to New Orleans,
where a large Cuban exile population feverishly
plotted against Castro. Oswald opened a chapter of
the Fair Play for Cuba Committee (FPCC), a proCastro organization. He handed out FPCC leaflets,
subscribed to leftist periodicals, and wrote letters to
U.S. Communist leaders exaggerating his exploits.
At the same time, he tried to join a CIA-funded antiCastro group, and offered to train Cuban exiles or
fight alongside them. The leader of this group confronted him in the street while he was distributing
pro-Castro leaflets, and both were arrested. Oswald
made a point of contacting the FBI and emphasizing
his FPCC activities. His trial brought him enough
publicity to get radio and TV interviews, until a
broadcaster exposed him as a dishonorably discharged defector and probable Soviet tool. The New
Orleans FPCC was completely disgraced.
What was Oswald up to in New Orleans? Critics
argued that he was burnishing his pro-Castro credentials, perhaps prior to infiltrating Cuba under
CIA control. He was also part of a larger CIA plan to
penetrate and discredit the FPCC in the United
States and Mexico. These authors noted that Oswald
gave his address as 544 Camp Street on FPCC
leaflets. From this address, two rabid anticommunists organized anti-Castro activities: Guy Banister
(a private detective and violent, alcoholic racist) and
David Ferrie (a pilot and adventurer). The address
was also the headquarters of a CIA-supported anti389

Kennedy, John F., Assassination of

Castro group. Critics contended that Oswald knew
Banister and Ferrie, and freely mingled with antiCastro Cubans. Oswald, in his FPCC guise, identified pro-Castro individuals in New Orleans so that
Banister could prevent them from infiltrating antiCastro groups, and Oswald only scuffled with the
anti-Castro Cuban leader as a staged provocation.
Critics reacted incredulously to the contention
that the FBI “lost track” of Oswald for two months
in New Orleans. Oswald mailed his New Orleans
address to places where the FBI intercepted all
incoming mail: the FPCC, the American Communist Party, and the Soviet Embassy. Similarly, these
authors disparaged CIA claims that they had “no
information” about Oswald’s New Orleans activities. How could a former defector to Russia walk
into a hub of CIA operations against Castro,
announce he was a pro-Castro activist, attempt to
infiltrate anti-Castro groups, and not generate
intense CIA interest? Either the CIA and FBI were
monumentally incompetent, or Oswald was an
intelligence asset. Loyalists believed that these
agencies indeed bungled, and explained Oswald’s
behavior in New Orleans as merely that of a
“weirdo” acting out his confused fantasies.
Oswald Impostors
After leaving New Orleans, Oswald took a bus to
Mexico City, ostensibly to obtain permission to
travel to the Soviet Union via Cuba. U.S. intelligence normally photographed everyone entering
the Soviet and Cuban consulates in Mexico City,
and taped all telephone conversations. Oswald
repeatedly phoned and visited the consulates, yet
unaccountably the CIA could provide no photos or
tapes of Oswald. The CIA claimed that the cameras
were broken or off when Oswald visited, and that
the tapes of Oswald’s calls were “routinely
destroyed” after they were transcribed. Thus, there
was no incontrovertible proof of what Oswald did
and said in Mexico.
Critics suspected that an Oswald impostor visited
Mexico at the same time as the real Oswald. The
CIA gave the WC a picture of a taller, older man
named “Lee Oswald” entering the Soviet consulate,
but later claimed they erred when they identified
390

him as the real Oswald. In any case, “Oswald” made
a strong impression on Soviet and Cuban consulate
personnel, and flew into a rage when told travel
paperwork would take four months. “Oswald” met
with a KGB officer from Department 13 (assassination specialists), and slept with a woman who had
previously sexually entrapped men for the Cuban
government. He might even have offered to kill
Kennedy for the Cubans. Critics maintained that
someone wished to create the impression that
Oswald was under Cuban control, that he received
advice from a KGB assassin, and that he planned to
escape via Mexico to Cuba after the assassination.
With his long record as a Marxist hothead, Oswald
was an excellent patsy if the objective was to declare
war on Cuba after the assassination. Critics argued
that the original plan changed after the assassination. Consequently, the CIA withheld evidence linking Oswald to Cuban and Soviet intelligence, and
the WC refused to follow any leads in this direction.
Critics maintained that Oswald doubles appeared
in the United States as well as Mexico City. For
example, witnesses testified that on different occasions, “Oswald” test-drove a car in Dallas, sold a
rifle, bought rifle ammunition, test fired a rifle, and
visited the Selective Service Office in Austin. Each
time, the man identified himself as Oswald, made
some reference to Oswald’s experiences, and acted
obnoxiously—yet each time, the real Oswald was
known to be elsewhere. Three men visited antiCastro activist Silvia Odio in Dallas while Oswald
was on the way to Mexico. One of the men was
introduced as “Leon Oswald.” Afterwards, one of
the other men called Odio and described “Leon” as
a “loco” ex-marine and expert marksman who
thought Kennedy should be shot. The WC dismissed this story using testimony later determined
to be fraudulent. Critics considered that the existence of Oswald doubles disproved the lone gunman thesis—someone was setting up Oswald as a
patsy. Loyalists dismissed the stories of doubles—
the witnesses were lying or mistaken.
Framing Oswald
Critics considered that much of the evidence linking Oswald to the assassination was manufactured

Kennedy, John F., Assassination of

in order to frame him. For example, they claimed
that photos of Oswald holding a rifle in his backyard
were faked. They questioned the authenticity of
Oswald’s order for the assassination rifle and of his
palm-print on the rifle. They noted that there was
no evidence that Oswald bought ammunition or
practiced shooting regularly. They doubted that
Oswald fired the rifle at a Dallas right-winger, or
that he could have stored the rifle and transported
it to the TSBD in the manner the WC described.
They noted that the police gave Oswald a paraffin
test for gunpowder residue. The test was positive
for the hands but negative for the cheek, which
indicated that he fired a pistol but not a rifle.
Police broadcast a description of the suspect only
15 minutes after the assassination. The WC assumed
this was based on the eyewitness testimony of
Howard Brennan. Critics wondered how Brennan
could have seen Oswald 100 feet away on the sixth
floor and described him accurately to police, when
he was unable to identify Oswald “for sure” in a
police lineup later that night. A great many other
eyewitness descriptions were available, so why were
the police fixated quickly and specifically on
Oswald?
Who Shot Tippit?
Some critics doubted that Oswald shot Officer Tippit. They did not believe Oswald could have gotten
from his house to the shooting scene in time to kill
Tippit, and doubted the witnesses who saw Oswald
at the scene. They questioned that the bullets at the
scene came from Oswald’s revolver, or that Oswald
owned the revolver the police said killed Tippit.
Other critics accepted that Oswald killed Tippit.
However, they asserted that the “real conspirators”
sent Tippit to kill Oswald—to silence the patsy—
but Oswald beat him to the draw. They alleged that
Tippit was the tool of organized crime or right-wing
politics.
Oswald’s Motives
Critics viewed the WC assessment of Oswald’s
motives as particularly vague and weak. Supposedly,
he killed Kennedy from hostility to his environment, inability to establish meaningful relationships

with others, discontent with the world, and the
desire to be a “great man” of history. Critics noted
that Oswald expressed admiration for Kennedy, and
had no particular reason to kill him. Oswald was not
insane, and steadfastly maintained his innocence
even when mortally wounded. Indeed, he explicitly
said he was a patsy, and critics believed him.
Who Was Ruby?
Loyalists believed that there was not just one homicidal lone nut in Dallas that November weekend,
but two. Jack Ruby was a low-class hustler, perpetually in debt, with a propensity for unpredictable
violence. He ran a series of nightclubs and failed
businesses in Dallas, and cultivated both police and
criminal contacts. The assassination greatly upset
Ruby, and he began hanging out at the police station, where he was well known. He masqueraded as
a reporter, and attended Oswald’s press conference.
Ruby did not know Oswald was being transferred to
the County Jail, and would have missed Oswald
entirely if Oswald had not delayed his departure to
change his clothes. On the spur of the moment,
Ruby pulled out his gun and shot Oswald in the
abdomen. Oswald was taken to Parkland, where he
died. Ruby explained that he wanted to spare Jackie
Kennedy the agony of a trial, and seemed to think
he would be regarded as a hero. His lawyer convinced him to plead temporary insanity, but the jury
convicted him of murder and sentenced him to
death. Ruby testified before the WC, which concluded that Ruby had no connection to the drug
trade, anti-Castro groups, or organized crime. The
WC further concluded that the Dallas police did
not help Ruby kill Oswald. Ruby was retried, and
died of cancer in prison in 1967.
Critics noted that Ruby had a lifelong association
with mobsters and closely associated with them in
Dallas. He was involved in sordid activities (nightclubs, prostitution, gambling, and drugs) that mobsters typically control. He lied about the number of
trips he made to Cuba in 1959, and did not go there
for pleasure but as a mob courier. Ruby’s longdistance calls from Dallas dramatically increased in
the months before the assassination, and many of
these calls were to people with mob connections.
391

Kennedy, John F., Assassination of

Ruby was heavily in debt to the mob. Did he “pay off
his IOU” by killing Oswald? Since Ruby was a familiar figure in the police station, he was the perfect
instrument to silence Oswald. Ruby did not act on
the spur of the moment—he clearly stalked Oswald
at the police station. Although there was no guarantee he would intercept Oswald, he lurked and waited
for the opportunity. Ruby warned the WC that the
assassination was a conspiracy, but fear for his life
and the prospect of a new trial inhibited him from
speaking frankly. Some critics believed his cancer
was no accident—he was eliminated before a new
trial gave him the opportunity to tell the real truth.
Loyalists asserted that the Chicago mob was
unlikely to trust someone as stupid and talkative as
Ruby with important business. He knew mobsters,
but was an insignificant hanger-on, and his calls to
mob figures before the assassination related to his
dispute with the stripper’s union. He lurked in the
police station from a pathetic desire to be associated with important events, and his conspiracy
claims to the WC reflected mental derangement.
The Garrison Affair
In New Orleans on the afternoon of the assassination, Guy Banister pistol-whipped an associate, who
then confided to his friends his suspicions that Banister’s partner, David Ferrie, had driven to Dallas to
serve as the getaway pilot for Kennedy’s assassins.
District Attorney Jim Garrison interrogated Ferrie,
and handed him over to the FBI, who questioned
and released him. In 1966, Garrison found criticisms of the WC compelling enough to begin his
own investigation into Oswald’s activities in New
Orleans in 1963. He concluded that Oswald was an
agent provocateur for U.S. intelligence—but who
controlled him? Banister was dead, but a New
Orleans lawyer told Garrison that on the day of the
assassination, “Clay Bertrand” asked him to represent Oswald. “Bertrand” turned out to be a pseudonym, and Garrison decided, on thin evidence, that
“Bertrand” was prominent local businessman Clay
Shaw. Garrison suspected that Shaw ran a CIA front
company involved in anti-Castro activities and the
assassination, and that Shaw knew both Ferrie and
Oswald. Garrison pressured Ferrie to talk, but Fer392

rie died of a brain aneurysm without talking. Under
pressure himself to produce results, Garrison
arrested Shaw and charged him with conspiracy to
kill JFK. Garrison produced dubious witnesses who
claimed they saw Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw
together, and used the trial to attack the “lone gunman” thesis (though this was not strictly relevant to
Shaw’s case). The jury quickly acquitted Shaw, but
the case became a global media circus and was the
basis for Oliver Stone’s movie JFK.
The critics fed Garrison, and Garrison fed the
critics. Prominent critics advised Garrison, and
some had access to the evidence he generated. He
obtained a copy of the Zapruder film, and allowed
critics to make and circulate “bootleg” copies.
Afterwards, critics contended that Garrison was on
the right track—the Oswald/intelligence link—but
his methods were unsound. They also observed that
his key witnesses died (suspiciously, of course).
Loyalists thought that Garrison was a publicityseeking megalomaniac. Interestingly, some loyalists
advanced their own conspiracy theory: Garrison
was protecting the Mafia and diverting attention
from them with his wild theories about CIA, Nazi,
and anti-Castro plots. They contended that Garrison treated the New Orleans Mafia laxly when he
was prosecutor, and never mentioned the Mafia as
a participant in the assassination conspiracy.
Indeed, he called mob sponsorship of the assassination “a myth.”
Congress Investigates
In the mid-1970s, after Vietnam and Watergate,
public willingness to believe in government duplicity was high. The issue of CIA involvement in the
Kennedy assassination gained enough momentum
that Congress established the House Select Committee on Assassinations (HSCA). Congress
appointed G. Robert Blakey to head the HSCA.
This choice strongly influenced the direction of the
investigation, because Blakey was a lawyer who specialized in organized crime. The HSCA critically
analyzed the WC report, and found many of its conclusions valid. Most importantly, the HSCA concluded that Oswald fired three shots from the
TSBD, and two struck Kennedy, killing him.

Kennedy, John F., Assassination of

Based on acoustical evidence from Dallas police
radios, the HSCA argued that there was a second
gunman in Dealey Plaza, and thus necessarily there
was a conspiracy. The HSCA could not identify this
gunman, but excluded the involvement of the
Soviet government, the Cuban government, the
Secret Service, the FBI, and the CIA in the conspiracy. The HSCA also excluded the involvement
of the Mafia and the anti-Castro groups as groups,
although “individual members may have been
involved.” Perhaps inevitably, critics were annoyed
and suspicious that the HSCA confirmed the Single
Bullet Theory and debunked many of their pet theories. Loyalists, however, were dissatisfied with the
conspiracy finding.
Some critics asserted that Blakey took charge of
the HSCA in order to redirect the investigation
away from uncomfortable evidence of U.S. government and anti-Castro Cuban involvement in the
assassination. They considered Blakey too cozy with
“potential suspects” (the FBI and CIA). Blakey was
unwilling to force these organizations to disgorge
what they knew about Oswald, and channeled staff
time and effort into the Mafia investigation at the
expense of every other avenue. Critics condemned
his “soft” handling of scientific and medical experts,
and his failure to ask “hard questions” about the
missing evidence and the authenticity of the
autopsy x-rays and photographs. In short, as one of
the HSCA investigators lamented, the investigation
was not even adequate, let alone the “full and complete” effort that Congress mandated. Critics even
took issue with the acoustic evidence, which they
believed indicated more than four shots.
Congressional investigations generated a few conspiracy incidents of their own. In 1975 and 1976,
two prominent mobsters—Johnny Roselli and Sam
Giancana—were murdered after they testified
before Congress about CIA-Mafia assassination
plots. An HSCA investigator planned to interview de
Mohrenschildt concerning his relationship with the
CIA and Oswald. Alas, the day before the interview,
de Mohrenschildt committed suicide. Critics
believed that these three important witnesses were
silenced before they could reveal what they knew
about the CIA-Mafia plot to kill Kennedy.

Loyalists took comfort that the HSCA debunked
many conspiracy theories and confirmed the basic
outline of the WC report. They considered the
acoustic evidence flawed, since they disbelieved in
a “fourth shot.” Naturally, they regretted that the
“blunder” of introducing this evidence only opened
the door to new conspiracy speculation and to a
flood of people fraudulently confessing that they
were the Grassy Knoll shooter.
Who Benefited?
Many critics approached the assassination like a
detective solving any other crime: first identify
someone with the motive, means, and opportunity
to commit the murder. Some critics considered
motive much more important than means or opportunity, especially as time passed and few truly new
facts about Dealey Plaza seemed likely to emerge.
Some believed that the government had so effectively hidden the truth and deceived the public that
to ask “How?” was futile. All that remained was to
ask “Why?” or, put differently, “Who benefited?”
The list of plausible suspects was long, and included
LBJ, the Mafia, the CIA, the FBI, the militaryindustrial complex, the Soviets, the Cubans, and the
anti-Castro Cuban exiles.
Lean and Hungry Lyndon
Craig Zirbel argues that LBJ was the central conspirator who orchestrated Kennedy’s assassination.
Johnson most directly benefited from the killing and
had the most power to cover his tracks. Zirbel
believes that the deeply immoral vice-president
hated the Kennedys, and was capable of murder.
LBJ was obsessed with becoming president, and
feared that Kennedy would drop him from the ticket
in 1964. He expected that his presidency would
bring great political and economic benefits to himself and his friends in the oil industry and militaryindustrial complex. The assassination occurred on
Johnson’s “home turf” (Texas) where he had many
connections to the police and organized crime.
Johnson was intimately involved in planning the trip,
and tried to put his political enemy, Senator Yarborough, in the presidential limousine instead of his
ally, Governor Connally. After the assassination,
393

Kennedy, John F., Assassination of

Johnson, as the new president, used his power—and
particularly his friendship with J. Edgar Hoover—to
ensure that the Kennedy autopsy and the WC
reached the “correct” conclusion (i.e., that Oswald
was the only assassin) and that evidence to the contrary was destroyed. Zirbel presents a strong circumstantial case for motive, but has no information
whatsoever on how Johnson planned and implemented the plot.
Goodfellas
David Scheim and Robert Blakey, among others,
contend that the Mafia had the motive and the
capability to kill Kennedy. Kennedy’s brother,
Attorney General Robert Kennedy, waged a relentless campaign against mob bosses Santos Trafficante and Carlos Marcello, and against Teamster
boss Jimmy Hoffa. Declassified wiretaps revealed
these men venting furious complaints against the
Kennedys and predicting they would be killed.
These mobsters thought Kennedy double-crossed
them. They helped Kennedy win the 1960 election,
provided him with a mistress, and cooperated with
the CIA, yet RFK persecuted them. Scheim insists
that both Oswald and Ruby were connected to
Marcello, but were sufficiently distant to make
excellent tools (i.e., Marcello need not implicate
himself or his lieutenants). Marcello somehow
induced Oswald to shoot Kennedy, but had backup
hitmen in the Plaza. Oswald’s primary role was as
patsy, and he was not expected to survive to reach
custody. When he did, Marcello ordered Ruby to
eliminate him. Scheim presents a great deal of evidence that Ruby was a longtime low-level mob
functionary but, like Oswald, completely deniable
and expendable.
The conclusions of the HSCA essentially supported this theory, although Blakey’s book stated
the theory more directly than the HSCA Report.
However, despite thousands of hours of wiretaps of
top mobsters, no conclusive proof exists of mob
involvement in the assassination. More problematically, how could the Mafia engineer a cover-up?
How could they be sure that the federal government would not discover the plot and crush them
after the assassination?
394

Rogue Elephant
Mark Lane asserts that the CIA killed Kennedy
because JFK planned to destroy the organization.
Kennedy betrayed the CIA at the Bay of Pigs, and
his efforts to bring the Agency under control afterwards threatened the organization’s existence. The
CIA benefited from the assassination, because the
organization survived and prospered. Supporters of
this theory observe that the CIA obviously had the
capability to kill Kennedy, and the Agency was
involved in many other assassination plots at this
time. Such a plot did not require the participation
of the entire Agency, but only a small, compartmentalized subgroup. These authors cite the abundant evidence of a CIA relationship with Oswald
discussed elsewhere in this essay, and some argue
that the CIA used mind-control techniques to program Oswald to kill. Others argue that Oswald was
not a robot, but a patsy (the real assassins were the
CIA’s pet Cubans). Ideally, from the CIA viewpoint,
the United States would blame Castro for the assassination and invade Cuba. Supporters of this theory
have long sought to prove that known CIA agents
were in or near Dealey Plaza, but so far none have
succeeded. For many years, speculation focused on
the identity of the “three tramps.” When the Dallas
City Council released the arrest records of the
tramps, they were revealed as genuine tramps.
The Director
Mark North asserts that FBI Director J. Edgar
Hoover hated JFK and RFK personally and politically. Hoover detested their immorality and liberalism, but more importantly, he resented their plans
to force him to retire. Hoover allegedly attempted
to blackmail the Kennedys into waiving his retirement, but failed. North argues that Hoover then
learned through surveillance and informants that
the Mafia planned to kill Kennedy. Hoover realized
that if the Mafia succeeded, his close friend Lyndon
Johnson would waive his retirement.
North contends that Hoover did what he could to
ensure that the plot succeeded. He withheld information about threats to the president from the
Secret Service, and allowed the Mafia plans to proceed undisturbed. North believes the FBI moni-

Kennedy, John F., Assassination of

tored Oswald, but let the Mafia manipulate Oswald
into his role as patsy. After the assassination,
Hoover ensured that the FBI championed the
“lone gunman” thesis, and suppressed, as much as
possible, evidence of Oswald’s relationship with the
FBI. North considers that Hoover suppressed evidence of Mafia involvement in the assassination,
because this avenue of inquiry might reveal that he
knew but did nothing. His triumph complete,
Hoover remained FBI director until his death in
1972. North’s theory, of course, relies heavily on
other theories, particularly with respect to Mafia
assassination plots.
The Military-Industrial Complex
The military-industrial complex (“MIC”) derived
great benefit from the cold war. The military had
plenty of shiny weapons, defense contractors
reaped huge profits, and politicians had many happily employed constituents. Kennedy’s efforts to
secure U.S.-Soviet détente in the autumn of 1963
threatened the MIC, and some authors consider
that the MIC played a role in the assassination.
Peter Dale Scott, for example, relates the assassination to Vietnam: Kennedy began to withdraw U.S.
troops from Vietnam, but after the assassination,
LBJ dramatically escalated U.S. involvement.
Indeed, the Kennedy assassination preserved the
“entire cold war status quo” for another twenty-five
years. Scott believes that when Oswald acted
strangely in New Orleans, Dallas, and Mexico City,
he was acting under orders from military intelligence. Scott claims that three Army Intelligence
agents were in Dealey Plaza during the assassination. He speculates that police officers and Secret
Service agents who were reserve Army Intelligence
officers facilitated the killing of Kennedy and
Oswald. Regrettably, Scott’s work contains much
conjecture but little specific, verifiable detail.
From Russia with Love
Michael Eddowes asserts that Khrushchev ordered
Kennedy’s assassination to avenge his humiliation in
the Cuban Missile Crisis and intimidate future
presidents. According to Eddowes, Oswald
defected to the Soviet Union but did not return—a

KGB assassin took his place. De Mohrenschildt
controlled “Oswald” for the KGB, not for the CIA.
Jack Ruby was also a KGB agent, and intended to
help “Oswald” escape to Mexico. However,
“Oswald” was caught en route to Ruby’s house, and
Ruby had to silence him instead. Among the many
fallacies in this theory, why would a KGB assassin
behave as Oswald did in New Orleans, and draw
attention to himself as a Communist troublemaker?
How did the double fool the real Oswald’s relatives?
Why would Khrushchev want to kill Kennedy,
when this would bring a cold warrior like Johnson
to power? Eddowes’s absurd theory received a decisive rebuttal in 1981, when Oswald was exhumed
and examiners found that he was the same man who
defected to Russia.
The Soviets probably had no role in the assassination, but still feared they might be blamed. In January 1964, a KGB officer, Yuri Nosenko, defected to
the United States with the electrifying claim that he
handled Oswald’s case when Oswald was in Russia.
Nosenko insisted that the KGB found Oswald of no
intelligence interest, and did not recruit him or his
wife. The CIA suspected that Nosenko was lying,
and had defected on KGB orders. Nosenko cooled
his heels in solitary confinement for three years until
the CIA decided he was a genuine defector.
The Cubans
If Khrushchev had little reason to kill Kennedy,
Castro had less. True, Kennedy had ordered the
CIA to “get Castro,” but in late 1963 Kennedy was
moving toward reconciliation with Cuba. If Castro
were caught, the Americans would destroy him, and
he would hardly choose such an unreliable (and
overtly pro-Castro) creature as Oswald for this delicate task. Nonetheless, in September 1963, Castro
threatened to assassinate U.S. leaders if they continued to try to assassinate Cuban leaders. From
1967 to 1976, gangster Johnny Roselli spread
rumors that Kennedy’s assassination was indeed
Castro’s retaliation. Most authors consider this just
another CIA-inspired effort to frame Havana.
The anti-Castro Cubans were powerfully motivated to kill Kennedy. They believed JFK betrayed
them at the Bay of Pigs, and he was shutting down
395

Kennedy, John F., Assassination of

their covert operations while he sought détente with
Castro in late 1963. Many Cuban exiles were trained
in guerrilla warfare and assassination, and thus had
the raw capability to kill Kennedy. The WC considered and rejected the theory that the anti-Castro
Cubans could somehow have used Oswald to kill
Kennedy, hoping to divert the blame onto Castro.
The HSCA investigated the “most violent and frustrated” exile groups, but concluded that Oswald had
no contact with these groups. HSCA investigator
Gaeton Fonzi was not so sure—he argued that the
committee did not fully explore this possibility.
A Conspiracy So Immense
In Our Dumb Century, the satirical magazine The
Onion has a parody news article about the assassination: “Kennedy Slain by CIA, Mafia, Castro, LBJ,
Teamsters, Freemasons: President Shot 129 Times
from 43 Different Angles.” This parody mocks the
numerous critics who believe a broad alliance of
motivated individuals and organizations conspired to
kill Kennedy. For example, Peter Dale Scott accuses
a “coalition of forces inside and outside government”
that included the Mafia, CIA, military intelligence,
the Texas rich, drug networks, the “Vietnam Lobby,”
and perhaps Johnson and Hoover. Similarly, Jim
Marrs brings nearly every conceivable suspect into
his big conspiracy tent, including the FBI, CIA, antiCastro Cubans, the military, LBJ, Texas oilmen,
international bankers, and the mob. Jim Garrison is
somewhat less inclusive—in his book, he names only
the CIA, FBI, Secret Service, Dallas police, and the
military. These critics have perhaps demonstrated
that Dark Forces (the “shadow government” or the
“business-banking-politics-military-crime power
structure”) lurk in America’s basement, but they have
not provided specific, incontrovertible evidence to
link the Dark Forces to the Kennedy assassination.
How could such vast conspiracies remain secret
for nearly forty years? Scott responds that the
Kennedy assassination was not the isolated act of a
few bad men, but a reflection of structural imperatives in U.S. “Deep Politics.” The assassination
resulted from “ongoing, unacknowledged processes”
that link normal political activity to the criminal
underworld. Scott cites alleged longtime U.S. gov396

ernment support for drug trafficking as another
example of such processes. In his view, a “conspiratorial network” existed in 1963, and still exists today,
that could easily have killed Kennedy and maintained secrecy afterwards.
Carl Oglesby presents a unique synthesis in The
Yankee and Cowboy War. He contends that JFK and
LBJ represented the two competing factions in U.S.
politics: “Yankees” and “Cowboys.” The Yankees
were the classic “eastern establishment”—New York
financiers, lawyers, and plutocrats—while the Cowboys were the scions of “new wealth” such as the oil,
aviation, and defense industries based in the South
and West. Every administration from 1933 onward,
Democratic or Republican, was a coalition of Yankees and Cowboys, but in the early 1960s, factional
cooperation began to erode. The basic issue was policy toward the Soviet Union—the Yankees favored
détente, while the Cowboys favored containment.
Containment implied high military spending, maintenance of forward positions in Eurasia, and intervention in Cuba and Vietnam. Détente implied
lower military spending, withdrawal from Eurasia,
and no intervention in Vietnam. Oglesby asserts that
the assassination resolved the debate in the Cowboys’ favor, and thus the cold war continued and the
United States fought in Vietnam. The Yankees
struck back in 1973, when they trapped Nixon (a
Cowboy) in the Watergate scandal, forcing him to
resign and allowing the Yankees to pursue cooperation with the Soviet Union.
Case Closed, or Perpetually Open?
The Warren Commission offered a single, relatively
coherent explanation of the Kennedy assassination.
This explanation immediately captured the “high
ground”—it became the dominant paradigm that
critics had to refute decisively before presenting
their own paradigm. After 1964, critics identified
apparent anomalies in the dominant paradigm, but
never displaced the WC from the “high ground”
because they could not resolve the apparent anomalies more effectively than the WC. They offered a
plethora of competing hypotheses, but no single,
coherent paradigm. Now four decades since the
shooting, there seems little agreement about many

Kennedy, Robert F., Assassination of

of the most basic facts, and the debate remains as
fierce and emotive as ever. With little hope that any
consensus will ever emerge (not least because
beliefs often seem to be held as a matter of faith),
what is certain is that Kennedy assassination lore
has become part of everyday American culture.
James D. Perry
See also: Castro, Fidel; Central Intelligence
Agency; Federal Bureau of Investigation; Hoover, J.
Edgar; Kennedy, Robert F., Assassination of; Mafia;
Oswald, Lee Harvey; Ruby, Jack; Warren
Commission.
References
Note: Gerald Posner is the best overall work from a
pro-Warren Commission viewpoint, and Jim
Marrs is the most comprehensive work from the
conspiracy viewpoint.
Blakey, G. Robert. 1981. The Plot to Kill the
President. New York: Times Books.
Crenshaw, Charles. 1992. JFK Conspiracy of Silence.
New York: Signet.
Eddowes, Michael. 1977. The Oswald File. New
York: Potter.
Epstein, Edward Jay. 1966. Inquest. New York:
Viking.
Fetzer, James. 1998. Assassination Science. Chicago,
IL: Catfeet Press.
Fonzi, Gaeton. 1993. The Last Investigation. New
York: Thunder’s Mouth Press.
Garrison, Jim. 1988. On The Trail of the Assassins.
New York: Time Warner.
Groden, Robert, and Harrison Edward Livingstone.
1990. High Treason. New York: Berkley.
Hurt, Henry. 1985. Reasonable Doubt. New York:
Henry Holt.
Kantor, Seth. 1978. The Ruby Cover-Up. New York:
Zebra.
Lane, Mark. 1966. Rush to Judgment. New York:
Holt Rinehart & Winston.
———. 1991. Plausible Denial. New York:
Thunder’s Mouth Press.
Lifton, David. 1988. Best Evidence. New York:
Carroll and Graf.
Marrs, Jim. 1989. Crossfire. New York: Carroll and
Graf.
Meagher, Sylvia. 1992. Accessories after the Fact.
New York: Vintage.
Melanson, Philip. 1990. Spy Saga. New York:
Praeger.
Menninger, Bonar. 1992. Mortal Error. New York:
St. Martin’s Press.

Newman, John. 1995. Oswald and the CIA. New
York: Carroll and Graf.
North, Mark. 1991. Act of Treason. New York:
Carroll and Graf.
Oglesby, Carl. 1976. The Yankee and Cowboy War.
Kansas City, MO: Sheed Andrews and McMeel.
Posner, Gerald. 1993. Case Closed. New York:
Random House.
Scheim, David. 1988. Contract on America. New
York: Zebra Books.
Scott, Peter Dale. 1993. Deep Politics and the Death
of JFK. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Summers, Anthony. 1989. Conspiracy. New York:
Paragon House.
Zirbel, Craig. 1991. The Texas Connection.
Scottsdale, AZ: Wright and Company.
Websites
Assassination Archives and Research Center: http://
www.aarclibrary.org.
John McAdams: http://mcadams.posc.mu.edu/
home.htm
JFK Lancer: http://www.jfklancer.com.
JFK Online: http://www.jfk-online.com/jfklinks.html.

Kennedy, Robert F., Assassination of
On 4 June 1968, presidential candidate and New
York senator Robert Francis Kennedy was assassinated in Los Angeles, California. Just five years earlier, President John F. Kennedy, the senator’s
brother, had been assassinated in Dallas, Texas, and
the investigation that followed had failed to adequately convince the U.S. public of the official “lone
gunman” theory. In President Kennedy’s case, conspiracy advocates pointed to a government cover-up.
Consequently, acknowledging that the American
people would closely scrutinize the Robert F.
Kennedy murder investigation, the Los Angeles
Police Department (LAPD) became determined to
conduct an extremely thorough investigation, which
would not leave any loose ends. Ironically, however,
the official investigation of the LAPD also pinned
the crime on a lone gunman. Sirhan Bishara Sirhan
was arrested and found guilty of the murder, but
much mystery and controversy has surrounded the
case ever since. Unable to find satisfactory answers
for several crucial questions in the investigation,
some writers have concluded that Robert Kennedy’s
murder must have been a conspiracy.
397

Kennedy, Robert F., Assassination of

Clutching his rosary beads, Senator Robert F. Kennedy lies wounded on the floor of the Ambassador Hotel, after being
shot by an assailant, following his victory speech in the California primary election. Kennedy’s wife, Ethel, is at lower left.
(Bettmann/Corbis)

The Events of 4 June 1968
In 1968 presidential candidates were not yet protected by the Secret Service. Also, Robert Kennedy’s
campaign team feared that a police presence around
Kennedy could be politically damaging, since police
were viewed by some as oppressors of minority
rights. Consequently, Kennedy’s team hired Ace
Security to protect the senator. Having won the California primary, Kennedy had made much ground in
gaining the Democratic presidential nomination.
After his victory speech in the crowded Embassy
Ballroom of the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles,
he was in the process of being escorted to a press
398

conference through two swinging doors of the
crowded hotel pantry by Thane Eugene Cesar, an
Ace Security guard. As Kennedy made his way
through the pantry, he shook hands with restaurant
workers. A few seconds later, the pantry erupted in
chaos as shots rang out and people pushed and
pulled in an effort to get to safety. Five injured people and Kennedy lay on the floor bleeding from
their wounds. Kennedy, spread-eagle on his back,
bled profusely from the back of his head and clasped
a rosary in his hand, which had been handed to him
by a busboy named Juan Romero. Kennedy died the
next day as a result of the wounds he received.

Kennedy, Robert F., Assassination of

More than seventy witnesses claimed to have seen
Sirhan fire in Kennedy’s direction. In fact, Sirhan
was still clutching a smoking .22-caliber revolver in
his hand when members of the crowd subdued him.
Just twelve hours before the murder, Sirhan had
been seen practicing rapid fire with a revolver at a
nearby rifle range. A police search of Sirhan’s home
uncovered a notebook in which he had written, “My
determination to eliminate R.F.K. is becoming more
of an unshakable obsession. . . . R.F.K. must die.”
And, further down the notebook page, Sirhan went
as far as to pinpoint a deadline for the murder. He
wrote, “Robert Kennedy must be assassinated
before 5 June 1968” (Knight, vol. I, 206). In the face
of this damaging evidence, however, there was still
one extremely important piece missing in the investigation puzzle. What was Sirhan’s motive? During
the police interrogation, Sirhan did not deny his
actions. Instead, he claimed that he could not recall
his actions or the reason for them. Consequently, in
an effort to assign a motive, investigators placed
Sirhan under hypnosis. Even though the psychological prodding revealed that Sirhan was very susceptible to hypnosis, it failed to shed any new light on a
possible motive. As a result, investigators constructed a political motive for the crime. As it turned
out, 5 June 1968 was the twentieth anniversary of
the Israeli-Arab War, and Palestinian-born Sirhan,
according to investigators, committed the murder
because of Kennedy’s public support of Israel.
The Trial
In the trial that followed, most of the physical evidence was not questioned. Instead, the main objective in the proceedings was to ascertain if Sirhan was
mentally impaired during the crime. It was at his
trial, in fact, that Sirhan, for the first time, accepted
the police assessment of his motive. Sirhan explained that he did not remember anything about
that night, because he was intoxicated. However, he
admitted that Kennedy’s promise to sell military aircraft to Israel, if he was elected president, greatly
angered him. Some writers, however, have contended that Sirhan had written his plan to kill
Kennedy in his notebook days before the candidate
had publicly announced his plan to support Israel.

In the end, the court found Sirhan guilty of firstdegree murder and five counts of assault with a
deadly weapon. Sirhan was sentenced to die by gas
chamber, but, after the California Supreme Court
ruled the death penalty unconstitutional in 1972, the
sentence was changed to life in prison.
Inconsistencies in the Evidence
From the outset, this seemingly airtight case left
some journalists with more questions than answers.
For example, how many bullets were fired? As early
as a few days after the shooting up to recent years,
this question has remained the most mysterious and
controversial issue in the Robert Kennedy murder
investigation. According to the LAPD, Sirhan’s gun
held eight bullets, and, therefore, only eight bullets
were fired. This official police stand, however, took
quite a bit of explaining in order to account for
Kennedy being shot four times, four bystanders
being shot once, one bystander being shot twice,
two holes in the ceiling tiles, and two holes in the
center post of the swinging doors that led to the
pantry—a total of fourteen holes but only eight official bullets. The official bullet accountability report
issued by the LAPD stated that bullet #1 entered
behind Kennedy’s right ear and remained lodged in
his head. Bullet #2 damaged the senator’s clothing as
it passed through his right shoulder pad and struck
Paul Schrade, a campaign worker, in the forehead.
Bullet #3 entered Kennedy’s back a few inches
below the top of his right shoulder and remained
lodged there. Bullet #4 entered his back one inch
below bullet #3, but this one exited the senator’s
body through the right front chest. Bullet #5 hit Ira
Goldstein in the right buttock and remained lodged
there. Bullet #6 only damaged Goldstein’s clothing
as it passed through a pants leg, struck the cement
floor, and ricocheted into Irwin Stroll’s left leg. Bullet #7 struck and remained lodged in William
Weisel’s left abdomen. Bullet #8 bounced off the
ceiling and stuck Elizabeth Evans in the head. The
holes in the ceiling, explained police, were caused by
a bullet entering through a tile, bouncing off of an
unknown object, and exiting another tile as it reentered the room. The police also explained that the
two holes in the center post were not bullet holes.
399

Kennedy, Robert F., Assassination of

Mysteriously, some police photos, which were not
submitted into evidence at Sirhan’s trial, document
two bullet holes in the center post of the two swinging doors that led into the pantry.
During the investigation, the LAPD removed the
damaged ceiling tiles and later destroyed them. The
center post of the swinging doors also met the same
fate. Years later, the LAPD claimed that the center
post was removed in order to make an x-ray examination to determine whether the holes had been
made by bullets. After the tests proved inconclusive,
however, the LAPD ordered both the center post
and the x-rays destroyed. In 1986, the LAPD
released a censored version of the assassination
investigation records. Finding more questions than
answers in the censored disclosure, conspiracy theorists once again began to thrive. In 1988, twenty
years after the assassination, LAPD Police Chief
Daryl Gates released the entire existing Robert
Kennedy assassination files to the public, which left
no doubt as to the incompleteness of the records.
For example, the files contained no record of or reference to the tests on or x-rays of the two holes
found on the center post. Many conspiracy theorist
have claimed that the police explanation of the bullet count versus the number of bullets would require
several acrobatic bullets, which defied the laws of
physics. These writers point out that the positions
and distances between Sirhan and the wounded do
not line up with the angles in which the bullets
entered the victims. What is more, all records of the
testimony of seven forensic experts about the crime
scene have disappeared from the records, the gun
used by Sirhan was ordered destroyed by incineration by the police, and over 2,000 photos of the
crime scene were burned. Why? Chief Gates
explained that much evidence was destroyed after
Sirhan’s conviction, because it was no longer
required and the police department had a great
need for space in the evidence room.
The next logical question asked whether there
was a second gunman. Many witnesses inside and
outside of the pantry reported that they heard two
shots, and after a short pause, a flurry of shots, which
have been compared by witnesses to the sound of
many balloons popping or many fireworks exploding
400

in rapid succession. Furthermore, eyewitnesses
reported that Sirhan was more than 5 feet away from
Kennedy when he fired at him. However, the
autopsy report stated that powder burns surrounded
the entry wound of the fatal bullet, which had struck
Kennedy at point blank range in the back of the
head. Also, the fatal bullet, according to the report,
was fired from behind. Yet, all witnesses placed
Sirhan in front of Kennedy during the shooting. To
add to the confusion, ballistics tests conducted by
the LAPD crime lab concluded that the bullets
extracted from Kennedy’s body were too distorted to
provide a positive match with any .22-caliber gun. In
1989, the supermarket tabloid the Globe published
an article in which it accused a Pakistani reporter of
being the actual assassin of Robert Kennedy. The
reporter sued the magazine for libel and won.
Besides this exonerated reporter, Thane Eugene
Cesar, the Ace Security guard who escorted
Kennedy through the pantry by the arm, has also
fallen under suspicion. Holding Kennedy by the
arm, it seems that he would have had the opportunity to shoot him in the back of the head and at
point-blank range. Cesar had been vocal in his dislike of the Kennedys. He owned a .22-caliber gun,
and he could have taken advantage of the confusion
in the room to do the deed. However, the police
investigation concluded that Cesar could not have
committed the crime because he was only carrying
his .38-caliber service revolver that night.
On the night of the assassination, a Kennedy campaign worker, Sandra Serrano, was a witness to “the
lady in the polka dot dress,” yet another unsolved
mystery in the Robert Kennedy murder. According
to Serrano, she stepped out of the hotel onto a fire
escape in order to get some fresh air. During this
time, Serrano said, she saw three people, a woman
and two men—one of which matched Sirhan’s
description—ascend the fire escape. Shortly after,
Serrano claimed that the same party, minus Sirhan,
quickly exited the hotel through the fire escape
shouting that they had shot Kennedy. A local television station interviewed Serrano less than an hour
after the shooting, and she described the couple.
According to Serrano, the woman wore a white
dress with polka dots. She was of light skin, wore

Kennedy, Robert F., Assassination of

black shoes, and had brunette hair. Her male companion, according to Serrano, was a twenty-threeyear-old Mexican-American man.
During police interrogation, however, Serrano
seemed less sure of what she had previously
claimed to have seen and heard. An audiotape of a
polygraph test conducted by investigators in 1968,
which had been sealed up by police until 1988, suggested that police had forced Serrano into denying
her previous statements about the night of the
shooting. When questioned by the media about the
forceful fashion in which the Serrano interview was
conducted, the LAPD replied that Sergeant Hernandez was merely following normal police routine.
Furthermore, shortly after the story about the
woman in the polka dot dress broke, the LAPD
claimed to have solved the mystery. Investigators
identified the polka dot dress woman as Valerie
Schulte, a campaign worker, who had nothing to do
with the crime. Unfortunately, Schulte did not
match the description by any of the witnesses. Both
her yellow dress and her blond hair were the wrong
color, and she was in crutches that night. In addition, in 1988 Serrano told a radio interviewer that
she had been forced to tell police that she had been
mistaken about the statements made by the couple
on the fire escape.
Nevertheless, several witnesses inside the hotel,
who claimed to have seen Sirhan with a woman
wearing a polka dot dress that night, substantiated
Serrano’s story. Some witnesses even claimed to
have seen Sirhan whisper in the ear of the lady in
the polka dot dress a few moments before he shot
at Kennedy. Outside of the hotel, Police Sergeant
Paul Sharaga also substantiated Serrano’s story.
Sergeant Sharaga was patrolling the area and got a
radio call about a shooting at the Ambassador
Hotel. Arriving on the scene, he parked his car and
ran toward the hotel. As he approached the building, he overheard a couple saying that they had shot
Kennedy. Sergeant Sharaga followed the couple but
lost them in the darkness. He immediately radioed
a description of a young man and a young woman
wearing a polka dot dress. Years later, retired
Sharaga claimed that the LAPD had taken it upon
itself to retract his statements. However, in later

interviews Sharaga continued to affirm his sighting
of the couple and his claim that he had overheard
them say that they had shot Kennedy.
Conspiracy Theories
Was Sirhan the assassin after all? Some psychohistorical studies claim that Sirhan was an extremely
proud and extremely unhappy individual who as a
youth had suffered through the Israeli-Arab War
(1948–1949). After immigrating to the United
States, he had failed in an attempt to become a successful jockey. Having been thrown off a horse, he
had injured his head, back, and right eye. What is
more, his head trauma had resulted in a mental
imbalance. After reading about Kennedy’s support of
Israel, according to some psychoanalysts, Sirhan
focused on Kennedy as an outlet for his anger and
frustration. With so much evidence missing, lost, or
destroyed, however, the question of who shot Robert
Kennedy may never be answered to the satisfaction
of many critics. At a parole hearing in 1997, Sirhan
said that he had not killed Kennedy, and he claimed
that he had been framed. Lawrence Teeter, Sirhan’s
attorney, claimed that his client had been hypnotized
and, consequently, used as a puppet to commit the
crime. Since Sirhan was in an imposed altered state
of consciousness, said Teeter, he should not be held
accountable for his actions. Besides not being aware
of what he was doing, Sirhan, Teeter continued, was
incorrectly positioned to have fired the fatal shot. In
1998, the thirtieth anniversary of Kennedy’s assassination, Sirhan once again announced that he was
innocent, and, once again, he was denied parole.
If the murder of Robert Kennedy was a conspiracy, then who was involved and why? Given Sirhan’s
susceptibility to hypnosis and Kennedy’s anti–Vietnam War stance, some writers have speculated that
renegade CIA agents may have hypnotized Sirhan
to kill Kennedy. Others have pointed to Kennedy’s
call to racial equality and suggested that the Ku
Klux Klan or other white supremacy groups may
have had a part in Kennedy’s death. The African
American civil rights leader Martin Luther King,
Jr., had been assassinated two months earlier, and
the senator’s show of allegiance to King’s cause had
angered many anti–civil rights groups. Also,
401

King, Martin Luther, Jr., Assassination of

Kennedy’s previous duels with organized crime provided yet another possible enemy with a motive.
Some writers have speculated that the woman in
the polka dot dress and her partner may have been
somehow linked to the mob. Certainly, the handling
of the investigation by the LAPD left many feeling
that the agency was either part of a conspiracy or
utterly incompetent.
Rolando Avila
See also: Kennedy, John F., Assassination of; Mind
Control; MK-ULTRA.
References
Knight, M. Janet, ed. 1971. Three Assassinations:
The Deaths of John & Robert Kennedy and
Martin Luther King. 2 vols. New York: Facts on
File, Inc.
Klaber, William, and Philip H. Melanson. 1997.
Shadow Play. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Moldea, Dan. 1995. The Killing of Robert F.
Kennedy: An Investigation of Motive, Means, and
Opportunity. New York: W. W. Norton and Co.
Question of Conspiracy: The RFK Murder. 2000.
Prod. and writer Andrew Holland, dir. Damian
Weyand. A&E Television Networks, The History
Channel.
Socarides, Charles W. 1979. “Why Sirhan Killed
Kennedy: Psychoanalytic Speculation on an
Assassination.” Journal of Psychohistory 6:
447–460.
Turner, William, and John Christian. 1993. The
Assassination of Robert Kennedy: The Conspiracy
and Cover-up. New York: Thunder House Press.

King, Martin Luther, Jr., Assassination of
Like the official reports into the other assassinations
of the 1960s, the government’s account of the killing
of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., on 4 April 1968 in
Memphis, Tennessee, is problematic because it is
filled with holes. The most significant difference
between other assassination conspiracy theories
and those related to the death of the great civil
rights leader and Nobel Peace Prize winner is that
a U.S. jury in a civil court in December 1999 actually concluded that a conspiracy resulted in the
death of Dr. King.
This jury, consisting of six white and six African
American Memphis residents, resolved that Dr.
402

King was murdered by a conspiracy involving a produce dealer with strong connections to the Mafia, a
racist restaurant owner, and various agencies of government at the city, state, and federal levels.
James Earl Ray was never convicted in a court of
law for killing Dr. King. Instead, Ray admitted guilt
through a plea bargain. Ray claims he pleaded
guilty in the face of threats of execution from a private attorney who took Ray’s case pro bono. Ray
recanted his admission three days later, but never
got a trial. A mock trial in the 1990s found Ray not
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
The 1999 civil lawsuit was filed by the King family against Lloyd Jowers, who once owned Jim’s
Grill, a restaurant only one block from the Lorraine
Motel where Dr. King was shot on the balcony in
front of his second-floor motel room. Jim’s Grill
stood on the bottom floor of Bessie Brewer’s rooming house, where the shot that struck Dr. King on
the right side of his face was reportedly fired from
a second-floor bathroom window. King’s family
sought $100 in actual damages from Lloyd Jowers
for the wrongful death of Dr. King; more importantly, they hoped to discover the truth about the
conspiracy that differed so greatly from the official
story of the U.S. government.
The Official Story
According to the official account by the House
Select Committee on Assassinations (HSCA), Dr.
King was killed by one shot fired from in front of
him; the shot emanated from the bathroom window
at the rear of a rooming house at 422 South Main
Street in Memphis. The shooter was James Earl
Ray, who had purchased the rifle using an alias and
transported it from Birmingham, Alabama, to
Memphis in order to kill Martin Luther King, Jr.
The HSCA discovered evidence that Ray did in
fact buy a .243-caliber rifle and telescopic sight in
Birmingham on 29 March using the alias Harvey
Lowmeyer (someone who had spent time with
Ray’s brother in prison). Ray returned it 30 March
for the more powerful .30–06 Remington Gamemaster that was used to kill King and that was found
near the crime scene. Ray claimed he bought the
rifle on the orders of “Raoul,” a man who Ray said

King, Martin Luther, Jr., Assassination of

he was involved with in a gun-running operation.
The HSCA concluded there was no Raoul.
Upon arriving to Memphis, Ray checked into the
New Rebel Motel using the alias of “Eric S. Galt.”
On the day of the assassination, Ray checked into
Bessie Brewer’s rooming house across from the
Lorraine Motel using the alias “John Willard.” Each
is an alias of a real person living in Toronto, Canada;
Ray had not ever met either of them. Moments
after the assassination, Ray supposedly dropped the
bundle containing the murder weapon near 424
South Main Street in front of a nearby business.
The HSCA concluded that it was highly probable
that James Earl Ray stalked Dr. King for a period
immediately preceding the assassination. After the
shot, Ray fled Memphis and traveled immediately
to Atlanta and ultimately to Toronto, Canada.
There, Ray hid using various aliases. Ray was
caught on 8 June 1968 by Scotland Yard in London
at Heathrow Airport.
The HSCA concluded that James Earl Ray’s alibi
for the time of the assassination, his story of being
set up by the mysterious figure “Raoul,” and other
allegedly exculpatory evidence, were not worthy of
belief. The HSCA also noted that Ray “knowingly,
intelligently, and voluntarily pleaded guilty to the
first degree murder” of Dr. King and thus he must
be guilty.
Consistent with conspiracy theories, the HSCA
wrote that “on the basis of the circumstantial evidence available to it, there is a likelihood that James
Earl Ray assassinated Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., as
a result of a conspiracy.” They summarized this
belief by noting several findings that were consistent
with a conspiracy. For example, an analysis of Ray’s
conduct before the assassination provided compelling indications of conspiracy, including the fact
that he had significant associations with others, such
as his own racist brothers, and that he had help robbing a bank in 1967. Additionally, his activities in
California, when he was a fugitive from justice after
escaping from the Missouri State Penitentiary, and
his strangely abrupt trip to New Orleans, were
viewed as suspicious. Finally, the HSCA found it
could not concur with any of the accepted explanations for Ray as a lone assassin because his supposed

motive of virulent racism could not be verified; thus
money must have been his motivation.
The HSCA found that there was substantial evidence to establish the existence of a St. Louis–based
conspiracy to finance the assassination of Dr. King.
Plans to kill King were widely discussed in St. Louis
among numerous individuals named by the HSCA;
yet, no link between Ray, his brothers, and the key
players of the St. Louis conspiracy was ever
acknowledged or explained. Despite this, the HSCA
believed it was likely that word of the standing offer
on Dr. King’s life reached Ray prior to the assassination and that Ray killed King for money. This conclusion was reached solely on evidence that Ray had
been to St. Louis in 1967 and may have heard about
the offer from one of his brothers who lived there.
The HSCA wrote that it was “unfortunate that
this information was not developed in 1968, when it
could have been pursued by law enforcement agencies equipped with tools not available to the committee and at a time when the principals were still
alive and witness’ memories were more precise.” Of
course, given that the FBI led the investigation, and
that its leaders hated King and viewed him as the
most dangerous man in the United States, it is not
surprising that this lead was not investigated. Furthermore, that the FBI hated King so greatly and
yet was still allowed to head the investigation into
his death lends credibility to the conspiracy theory
that they were somehow involved in his death.
After conducting a cursory review of possible
involvement by right-wing extremist organizations,
and by people in Memphis, New Orleans, Atlanta,
Birmingham, Louisville, St. Louis, Miami, Texas,
and New York, the HSCA concluded that no private
organizations or individuals were involved in the
assassination of King. They also concluded that “no
federal, state or local, government agency was involved in the assassination of Dr. King,” including
the FBI, Memphis Police Department (MPD), and
the Missouri State Penitentiary from which Ray had
escaped.
Problems with the Official Story
Conspiracy theories related to the murder of Dr.
King arose out of inconsistencies in the official
403

King, Martin Luther, Jr., Assassination of

story. Here, the conclusions of the HSCA investigation speak volumes. On the one hand, the HSCA
concludes that the investigation was fundamentally
flawed and that government agencies all but set
King up to be murdered; on the other hand, it then
concludes that there was no direct involvement by
government agencies in King’s death.
The HSCA summary report concluded that: “The
Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation performed with varying degrees of
competency and legality in the fulfillment of their
duties; The Department of Justice failed to supervise adequately the Domestic Intelligence Division
of the Federal Bureau of Investigation; in addition,
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, in the Domestic Intelligence Division’s COINTELPRO [counter
intelligence] campaign against Dr. King, grossly
abused and exceeded its legal authority and failed to
consider the possibility that actions threatening bodily harm to Dr. King might be encouraged by the
program; The Department of Justice and Federal
Bureau of Investigation performed a thorough
investigation into the responsibility of James Earl
Ray for the assassination of Dr. King, and conducted
a thorough fugitive investigation, but failed to investigate adequately the possibility of conspiracy in the
assassination; [furthermore] the Federal Bureau of
Investigation manifested a lack of concern for Constitutional rights in the manner in which it conducted parts of the investigation” (U.S. House, 3).
Even if the poor FBI investigation was the only
problem with the official story, there might be
strong justification for believing in a conspiracy. Yet,
there are many other problems with the official
story, as well as clear indicators of a conspiracy.
The first is the lone assassin, James Earl Ray. Ray
dropped out of high school and worked in the dye
room of a shoe factory for less than a year before he
was laid off. Six weeks later he enrolled in the army
and was stationed in West Germany where he was
charged with drunkenness and breaking arrest. Ray
was then discharged for ineptness and lack of
adaptability for service in 1948. Ray’s criminal
record prior to the assassination reportedly includes
no acts of violence (other than robberies), no shootings, no hate crimes against blacks; Ray was a petty
404

crook. His record included small-time thefts, burglaries, and robberies. Despite a relatively minor
criminal history, Ray was described as a professional
criminal by the HSCA. Ray made two escape
attempts from Missouri State Penitentiary and
broke out one year prior to the assassination by hiding in a bread truck. Over the following elevenmonth period, Ray traveled extensively in North
America, residing in such cities as Chicago, Montreal, Birmingham, Los Angeles, and Atlanta,
despite having no known source of income. The
HSCA suggested that Ray had robbed a bank in his
hometown in Illinois in July 1967, possibly with the
help of at least one brother, and that this money
could have been used to fund his travel. The HSCA
found no direct evidence of his involvement, but
discussed page after page of evidence of past robberies committed by unknown assailants who the
HSCA thought were Ray and his brothers.
The next suspicious set of problems relates to the
shot itself. The exact position of King at the time of
the shooting is not known, so the HSCA concluded
that the shot could have come from the bathroom
window or from the ground in front of the Lorraine
Motel. Engineering tests on the bullet trajectory
thus can be viewed as “inconclusive.” Witnesses
claimed King was leaning over the railing on the
balcony when he was shot, and they described King
as being thrown backwards off his feet. This would
mean King was shot from below rather than from
above. The HSCA concluded the bullet could have
come either from above or below from the bushes.
A shot from the bathroom would have been very
difficult due to the type of gun; the partially
obstructed view of the balcony by trees and shrubs;
the position of the tub in the bathroom; and the
bathroom wall, which left only two feet to maneuver the gun and make the shot. Ray had only earned
the rank of marksman in the army, the lowest rank
one can earn upon graduating from boot camp.
In the 1990s new investigations were launched
by the King family and others; ballistics tests undertaken at this time were unable to match bullets
from the gun to the bullet taken from King. Not all
testimony from the HSCA concluded the bullet was
fired from the gun alleged to have been used to kill

King, Martin Luther, Jr., Assassination of

King. Judge Joe Brown claimed in a speech that
more than half of ballistics tests show it was not the
gun that killed King.
Accounts of Ray’s supposed activities before and
after the fatal shot was fired are suspicious. Before
the shot was fired, Ray allegedly spent at least fifteen minutes in the bathroom on the second floor
of the rooming house. Yet, a dresser moved away
from the window did not contain Ray’s prints, nor
did the chair pushed up to the window. Ray’s prints
were also not found in the bathroom from where he
supposedly fired the shot.
Accounts of the activities in the bathroom preceding the shot are inconsistent. One witness
claimed to have tried to use the bathroom twice,
but found it to be occupied. He then went to the
room of Charles Stephens, the common-law husband of Grace Stephens, the owner of the rooming
house. Grace Stephens described a man fleeing the
bathroom who did not resemble Ray. Investigators
did not believe her and, after refusing to change her
story, she was confined to a mental hospital.
Charles Stephens supposedly went to the bathroom also, and told the witness that Ray was inside.
James McGraw, a taxi-driver, however, said Stephens
was in his bed, too drunk to get up and at 6 P.M. the
bathroom door was wide open. If true, this suggests
that the shot was not fired from the bathroom.
Most troubling about the actual shot is that
friends and acquaintances of King claimed he was
on the balcony in front of his room, smoking a cigarette and waving to supporters for ten to fifteen
minutes prior to being shot at 6:01 P.M. If King was
out in the open for this period of time, why was he
not shot earlier? Some suggest that someone must
have expected King to be on the balcony at precisely 6 P.M. and only prepared to shoot him at that
time. If this is true, then a conspiracy would have to
be involved in King’s death, for someone would
have had to know about King’s intention to leave his
room at 6 P.M. to go to dinner with his colleagues.
Given the fact that the FBI had wiretapped King’s
phones, and that the Memphis Police Department
had an undercover operative in the King entourage,
that governmental agencies knew of King’s movements is beyond question.

The official account of what happened after the
shot is also troublesome. Ray reportedly dropped a
bundle of materials in front of Canipe’s Amusement
Company, a building next door to the rooming
house, while fleeing. He supposedly dropped this
bundle because he saw an empty police car 200 feet
away and became scared. Although photographs
confirm the presence of this police car, some scholars conclude the drop of the bundle makes no
sense, because the drop location is slightly out of
the way from his parked car.
The contents of the bundle are problematic, as
well. Inside numerous items were found, including
the .30–06 Remington Gamemaster slide-action rifle,
serial No. 461476, model 760, with a Redfield variable telescopic sight, serial No. A17350, and Weaver
sight mount. Also inside the bundle were cans of
Schlitz beer, the 18 April edition of the Memphis
Commercial Appeal, a plastic bottle of aftershave
lotion, a pair of binoculars, and a portable radio with
the identification number scratched off. When the
FBI was able to decipher the number, it was revealed
to be Ray’s Missouri State Penitentiary inmate number. Initially, Ray’s prints were found on the rifle, the
binoculars, a Schlitz beer can, and the front page of
the Memphis Commercial Appeal. Later, Ray’s prints
were identified on the telescopic sight of the rifle and
on the bottle of aftershave lotion. However, no prints
were found on the unspent bullets found in the bundle, and the bullets were of different types and made
of different metals than the one that killed King.
Judge Arthur Hayes, Ray’s original attorney, says
a witness to the drop (Guy Canipe) claimed it
occurred ten minutes prior to the fatal shot. If true,
this serves as evidence of a conspiracy. Canipe
never saw the man who dropped the bundle, but
only heard a thud and witnessed a man walking
away quickly. Other witnesses saw this man get into
a white Mustang and drive away. Their description
was consistent with Ray but none could directly
identify Ray. Ray owned a white Mustang but
claims he was getting gas at the time of the shooting, only to return to the area and drive away after
seeing all the commotion.
It is clear that a white Mustang screeched away
from the scene at about 6:03 P.M., only two minutes
405

King, Martin Luther, Jr., Assassination of

after the shooting. Some speculate that it would not
have been possible for the assassin in only two minutes to retrieve his materials into a bundle, run
down the hallway of the second floor of the rooming house, go down the stairs to drop the bundle
after seeing a police car, get into his car, and finally
drive away. Some witnesses allegedly reported seeing two white Mustangs on the same street,
although this is unlikely.
One report verifies that another man by the name
of Ted Andrews, who wore clothes similar to Ray,
was also seen at Jim’s Grill by the owner, Lloyd Jowers. Andrews rented a room at another rooming
house and instructed the owner to wake him at 5:30
P.M. so he could make some phone calls. Andrews
reportedly left to make the calls and then returned
after the assassination. An investigation into
Andrews shows that he was a former officer in the
navy and that his FBI file is mostly blacked out. His
connection, if any, to the assassination, has never
been established.
Bobbie Balfour, who worked at Jim’s Grill in 1968,
testified in the 1999 civil trial that she was not permitted to deliver breakfast to the second floor of the
rooming house on the day of the assassination, where
she sometimes delivered it to Grace Stephens. She
also testified that upon returning to the restaurant
the morning after the assassination, her boss, Lloyd
Jowers, told her the police had found a gun on the
ground in the back of the restaurant, where a large
group of trees and shrubbery stood at the time of
the shooting.
Numerous witnesses report seeing and hearing a
man in these bushes below the Lorraine Motel balcony across the courtyard. These witnesses were
essentially ignored, including Solomon Jones, King’s
chauffeur, and at least one other tenant of the rooming house. Other witnesses who have always said
they heard what sounded like a firecracker going off
below the room in the courtyard were not believed.
Olivia Catling, a nearby resident, testified at the
1999 civil trial that she heard the shot and ran to the
scene with her children. She said she saw a man run
and jump into a green car and drive away, that the
police saw him, and did not follow him. She also
heard a fireman say to the police: “That shot came
406

from those clump of bushes.” Officers approached
the bushes with guns drawn but found no one
there. Some claim footprints were found in this area
and that molds were taken, but the results were
never publicized.
The bushes behind Jim’s Grill were cut down by
the City of Memphis the day following the assassination. Earl Caldwell, a New York Times reporter,
said he saw a man crouched in these bushes and
saw a puff of smoke after the shot; he told officers
of this and it was verified by Solomon Jones in a
sworn deposition to the FBI and MPD. A sanitation
official testified that he received a call from MPD
Inspector Sam Evans at 7 A.M. on 5 April telling him
to cut the bushes down. Whether this was an
attempt to destroy evidence may never be known;
at the very least, it is suspicious.
Perhaps the most unbelievable element about
the official story that Ray was a lone assassin is that
Ray used the aliases of people he allegedly did not
know while he was on the run from the law. Ray
used the names of real people, each living within
two miles of each other in Toronto. The aliases Ray
used included “Eric Starvo Galt” and “Eric S. Galt,”
“John Willard,” “Paul E. Bridgeman,” and “Ramon
George Sneyd.” All of these men are similar in
physical characteristics to Ray; Galt even had a scar
on his face and right hand, just like Ray. Each of
these men reportedly had visited the United States
and had some kind of interaction with the police
while there. This leads to the possibility that Ray
got these aliases from some law enforcement
agency. One scholar suggests the possibility that
Ray could have obtained these aliases from the Law
Enforcement Intelligence Unit (LEIU), a private
association of police intelligence squads within
more than 200 police department and penal authority members.
Eric St. Vincent Galt reportedly was involved in
Canadian military intelligence on a CIA and Royal
Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) weapons project known as the proximity fuse. Eric S. Galt was
originally one of Ray’s aliases. According to the
HSCA, Ray had established himself as Eric S. Galt
and used that name almost exclusively for nine
months preceding the assassination.

King, Martin Luther, Jr., Assassination of

When he rented an apartment or a room, bought
a car, secured a driver’s license, took dance lessons,
rented a safe deposit box, visited a doctor, attended
bartending school, and subscribed to a locksmith
course, Ray did so as “Eric Starvo Galt.” On the other
hand, in transactions directly linked to the assassination, Ray deviated from this established identity and
used the aliases of “Harvey Lowmeyer” (only to purchase the rifle) and “John Willard” (only to rent the
room at Bessie Brewer’s rooming house). He used
the aliases “Paul E. Bridgeman” and “Ramon George
Sneyd” to rent rooms in Toronto. Ray reportedly
changed rooms and the name he used to rent the
rooms on the very day that the FBI finally
announced who he really was. Originally, the FBI
issued an All Points Bulletin (APB) for Eric S. Galt.
Ray’s use of the Galt alias is problematic for at
least two reasons. First, not using the Galt alias during the assassination suggests Ray did not want officials to know of the real Galt. Second, there is no
Eric Starvo Galt, but there is an Eric St. Vincent
Galt. Government employment files contain the
signature of Eric St. Vincent Galt, who often signed
his name “Eric St. V. Galt.” Given that Galt used
large circles instead of dots to punctuate, his signature looked like “Eric Starvo Galt.” This means Ray
must have obtained the “Eric Starvo Galt” alias by
examining Galt’s files. The fact that the CIA had
access to these files points to their involvement in
providing Ray with this alias.
It is unlikely that Ray made up the alias “Eric
Starvo Galt.” All of Ray’s previous aliases were people he knew or had at least heard of. Considering
that Ray and Galt looked so much alike, that Ray
had plastic surgery on his nose four months prior to
the assassination to make it less distinguishable, that
Ray had never been to Toronto, that Ray had never
met Galt, and that the name “Starvo” likely was misread by Ray somewhere, it is at least possible that
Ray was provided with this alias. If so, this means a
conspiracy was involved in King’s death.
Galt’s official record is contained in a detailed file
by the RCMP, which often shares intelligence with
the CIA. One examination into Eric St. V. Galt
found that his father was a private detective in
South Africa who came to Canada before Galt was

born. While on the run, Ray supposedly wrote to
the South African consul using the Galt alias in
order to request permission to go to Rhodesia. How
Ray could have known about Galt’s father without
seeing his family background on paper is unclear.
Perhaps Ray’s story of Raoul is real after all. For
example, Jules Ricco Kimble (a.k.a. Rollie) lived in
Montreal, where he sold guns, listened to police
broadcasts, and made calls to places in the United
States including New Orleans. Ray once said he
met Raoul at a New Orleans bar. One researcher
claimed Rollie was also once arrested in Louisiana.
An FBI agent, in an interview with a researcher,
claimed to have found papers in Ray’s car with the
name of Raoul on them, but that he withheld them
from his superiors.
As Ray fled from authorities, some claim he was
visited by an anonymous person, described as a “tall,
fat man.” At one residence, this man reportedly delivered an envelope for “Paul Bridgeman.” At another
residence, an envelope was delivered for “Raymond
Sneyd.” Conspiracy theorists allege that these were
payments intended for Ray and were made by someone (e.g., Raoul) who thus knew of the aliases he was
using. Some researchers have alleged that Ray
ordered a ticket to London on 6 April, only four days
after the assassination. The ticket supposedly arrived
on 26 April but Ray did not pick it up until 2 May, one
of the days that Ray was visited by the “fat man.” In
an interview, the “fat man” told the researcher that
he’d be killed if he talked. The “fat man” spoke of an
envelope he delivered to Ray that contained a letter
with connections to Portugal and big money.
Ray also reportedly received phone calls at each
residence in Toronto and in London. All of this suggests, at the very least, that Ray did not act alone,
and that he possibly had help fleeing from the law.
Clear Evidence of
Government Involvement?
Although the 1999 civil jury found that various agencies of government at the city, state, and federal levels were involved in King’s death, they failed to name
specific agencies. Here, circumstantial evidence is
suggestive of the agencies that the jury may have
been referring to.
407

King, Martin Luther, Jr., Assassination of

For example, immediately after King was shot,
the first person to his side and the first person to
point to the rooming house where the shot was supposedly fired was Marrell McCollough, the minister
of transportation for the Invaders, an organization
working with King’s Southern Christian Leadership
Conference (SCLC). McCollough was actually an
undercover officer with the Memphis Police
Department; later he would join the Secret Service.
McCollough reported directly to MPD Intelligence Officer Eli Arkin, who had links to the FBI.
James Harrison, an FBI informant within the
SCLC, left for Atlanta the day before the assassination, the same place Ray would go immediately after
the shooting. Harrison later testified of army personnel in the MPD the week that King was killed.
This was verified by Arkin during the 1999 civil trial.
The FBI’s hatred for King was legendary in the
1960s. For example, in November 1964, the FBI
sent a memo to King telling him to kill himself,
accompanied by tape recordings from their phone
taps of King’s phones that reportedly contained
conversations with women other than his wife. The
document, released through a freedom of information request, showed that the FBI saw King as a
fraud and suggested that they saw King as the most
dangerous man in America.
King became a target because of his “Poor People’s Campaign” and his harsh criticisms of U.S.
involvement in Vietnam. First, King threatened to
launch a massive, nationwide sit-in involving the
nation’s poor, demanding, among other things, a
guaranteed minimum family income. Second, King
called the United States the “greatest purveyor of
violence in the world” for its war in Vietnam. Thus,
King directly attacked U.S. economic and political
systems; given his widespread following, the government had legitimate reason to fear the end of the
status quo. This alone lends credibility to conspiracy
theories that claim the U.S. government wanted
King dead.
In addition to this, many commentators have
noted that FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover was a
racist and personally hated King. When one considers that the FBI conducted the official investigation
into King’s death, it is easy to understand the con408

cerns of the HSCA related to the investigation.
King was literally at the center of the civil rights
movement in the United States and was its most
eloquent spokesperson; logically his death would
disrupt the movement, if not end it.
The CIA also had files on King, including a
report from FBI director Hoover to President
Johnson that described King as “an instrument in
the hands of subversive forces seeking to undermine our nation.” King was considering running for
U.S. president at the time, and the CIA saw King as
a threat to national security. While the CIA has
attempted to kill foreign leaders through its alleged
assassin training programs such as QJWINN,
WIROGUE, and MK-ULTRA, and though it admits to
carrying out international assassinations in the past,
the CIA has never admitted to trying to kill a U.S.
citizen. Given that King was viewed as an enemy of
the state, however, perhaps the CIA did not consider him a “real American.”
The involvement of the MPD in the death of
King makes sense given the connections between
its officers and the FBI. For example, the MPD
chief was Frank Holloman, a former FBI member
who spent seven years working under Hoover. If
the FBI or the CIA wanted King dead, they would
likely work through agencies of local government
such as a southern police department, where racist
attitudes would already be more prevalent.
A memo written by the FBI published in a local
newspaper in Memphis called King a hypocrite for
staying in the white-owned Holiday Inn rather than
a black-owned motel. Thus, King switched his room
to the Lorraine Motel, where he was shot. King’s
room was switched from the first to the second floor
by a “light-skinned SCLC associate,” according to
the motel owner. In fact, no SCLC associate ever
admitted to this.
The government often used mainstream media
outlets such as major magazines and newspapers to
discredit King. On the day King was killed, his specific whereabouts were broadcast over the radio. All
of this suggests that King could have been set up by
an elaborate conspiracy to be murdered on 4 April.
For example, the normally heavy FBI surveillance of King stopped on 3 April. Army sharp shoot-

King, Martin Luther, Jr., Assassination of

ers who were in place to deal with any rioters associated with King’s visit to Memphis were pulled
back on the day of the shooting. Carthel Weeden,
captain of the nearby fire station, claimed that he
was approached by military intelligence officers on
the day of the killing. He led them to a rooftop
overlooking the balcony and rooming house. They
had briefcases containing cameras, to take pictures
of the surrounding area. Although some claim these
were the real killers, it has widely been acknowledged that these men did in fact take pictures,
probably of the entire assassination, although such
pictures have never been viewed.
In addition, the MPD units that normally tracked
King were moved back several blocks prior to the
assassination. One unit was only one block away at
the fire station, on a rest break at the time of the
killing. After King was shot, no APB was issued for
the killer, no seal of the city was issued to stop the
killer’s escape, and no signal Q (for radio quiet) or
signal Y (for coordinating red lights) was issued. A
private ambulance was not allowed to transport King
after the shooting; five minutes elapsed until the city
ambulance arrived to transport King to the hospital.
A black Memphis police officer, Edward Reddit,
was removed and sent home on the day of King’s
killing because of a death threat from a “reliable
secret service informant.” Furthermore, two black
firemen were sent to a different station at the
request of the MPD. The FBI contacted the MPD
and told them that the death threat was actually
made against an officer in Knoxville, not in Memphis; this call reportedly was received at 4:15 P.M.
but Reddit was still driven home by Eli Arkin at
5:00 P.M. It is not clear what motivated these
actions, but they add to the speculation that the
assassination plot was well planned and involved
numerous individuals within the city of Memphis.
MPD surveillance files of King were ordered to
be released by a court in 1976 but they were
destroyed by fire the day before they were to be
picked up by the Memphis American Civil Liberties Union. One scholar claims that the complete
MPD files on King were never shared with the
HSCA; the ones that were shared were supposedly
doctored.

One thing is certain: the records of the HSCA are
sealed until 2028, and Royal Canadian Mounted
Police data on King are inaccessible, likely at the
request of the CIA. HSCA evidence is not subject
to freedom of information requests because it is
part of the congressional record. This is to protect
the names of innocent persons not involved in King
assassination.
Richard Sprague, the first leader of the HSCA,
originally promised to make all records available to
the HSCA. He claims he was forced to resign. The
second Committee chair, from 1976 to 1978, was
Walter Fauntroy. He claims his phone and television
were bugged. Fauntroy reported reading files later
in the 1990s that documented a meeting between
the FBI chief, CIA operatives, and military officers
in Southeast Asia concerning training assassins.
Fauntroy claimed he tried to write a book about this
but was then investigated by the Justice Department
for a misdated check. He took this as a warning.
When Ray escaped from prison in 1977, Fauntroy heard reports about an FBI SWAT team being
organized to kill him; Fauntroy alerted local officials who eventually caught Ray before the FBI
could get to him.
The 1999 civil jury did not name government
agencies, but it did name Frank Liberto, a produce
dealer, as the man who paid the money to have King
killed. Liberto allegedly delivered $100,000 to Lloyd
Jowers at Jim’s Grill for payment to kill King. Raoul
supposedly also brought the rifle in a box to Jowers
the day before the killing. John McPherson, another
store owner, testified that he picked up produce at
5:15 P.M. from Liberto’s store and heard him say
“shoot the SOB on the balcony.” Café owner Lavade
Addison, a friend of Liberto’s in the 1970s, has
claimed Liberto admitted that he funded King’s
killing.
The links between Liberto and the government in
this case are not clear. However, a thorough investigation into Liberto shows he had deep connections
to the Mafia, the CIA, and other powerful interests,
all of whom have demonstrated in the past that it is
acceptable to murder someone viewed as a threat to
the nation. And so, as with many conspiracy theories, the leading theory of the death of Martin
409

Kissinger, Henry

Luther King, Jr., alleges that King was murdered by
someone with ties to the CIA, FBI, local police
department, and Mafia.
Matthew B. Robinson
See also: Civil Rights Movement; COINTELPRO;
Federal Bureau of Investigation; Hoover, J. Edgar.
References
Huie, William. 1997. He Slew the Dreamer: My
Search, with James Earl Ray, for the Truth about
the Murder of Martin Luther King, Jr.
Montgomery, AL: Black Belt Press.
Joesten, Joachim. 1969. The Case against J. Edgar
Hoover in the Assassinations of President John F.
Kennedy, Senator Robert Kennedy, Dr. Martin
Luther King: A Public Indictment before the High
Court of World Opinion. New York: J. Joesten.
Lane, Mark, and Dick Gregory. 1978. Code Name
“Zorro”: The Murder of Martin Luther King, Jr.
New York: Pocket Books.
———. 1993. Murder in Memphis: The FBI and the
Assassination of Martin Luther King. New York:
Thunder’s Mouth Press.
Melanson, Philip. 1989. The MURKIN Conspiracy:
An Investigation into the Assassination of Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr. New York: Praeger.
———. 1994. The Martin Luther King
Assassination: New Revelations on the Conspiracy
and Cover-Up. New York: S.P.I. Books.
Newton, Michael. 1989. The King Conspiracy. Los
Angeles, CA: Holloway House.
Pepper, William. 1995. Conspiracy: The Truth
behind Martin Luther King, Jr.’s Murder. New
York: Harper Collins.
———. 1998. Orders to Kill: The Truth behind the
Murder of Martin Luther King, Jr. New York:
Warner.
Posner, Gerald. 1999. Killing the Dream: James Earl
Ray and the Assassination of Martin Luther King,
Jr. London: Little, Brown.
Ray, James Earl. 1997. Who Killed Martin Luther
King? The True Story by the Alleged Assassin.
New York: Marlowe.
U.S. House. 1979. Report of the Select Committee
on Assassinations of the U.S. House of
Representatives. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Websites
National Archives and Records Administration:
http://www.nara.gov/research/jfk/hscaindex.html.
Transcripts of the Martin Luther King, Jr.
Assassination Conspiracy Trial: http://www.
thekingcenter.org/tkc/trial.html.

410

Kissinger, Henry
After coming to prominence as a Harvard scholar,
Henry Kissinger served as President Richard
Nixon’s national security adviser (1969–1973) and
as the secretary of state (1973–1977) under both
Nixon and Gerald Ford. Kissinger held both posts
simultaneously, but even before then he had
directly run foreign policy from the White House,
repeatedly bypassing the State Department. This
direct approach occasionally led to policy masterstrokes such as Nixon’s visit to China, but it also created an air of secrecy as policy was made without
congressional and public scrutiny. This was most
controversial in the Vietnam War, but Kissinger has
also been accused of breaking international law
elsewhere and of involvement in secret buggings
and wiretaps.
At Harvard, Kissinger made his reputation with a
study of the realpolitik of the Austrian chancellor,
Klemens von Metternich, who emphasized power
and self-interest over more moral concerns.
Kissinger’s liberal critics (especially Hitchens)
accuse him of secretly pursuing similarly amoral
policies, including tacit endorsement of the 1971
Bangladesh coup that led to 3 million deaths and
of Indonesia’s invasion of East Timor in 1975, which
caused 200,000 deaths. Vietnam, however, is the
main issue of contention, with Kissinger being
accused, for instance, of sabotaging the 1968 Paris
peace talks to ensure Nixon’s victory at the polls. The
U.S. and North Vietnam had agreed to a bombing
halt, but, following Kissinger’s tip-off, Nixon’s camp
and right-wing supporters pressed the South Vietnamese government into renouncing the plan. The
move all but ensured Nixon’s victory, but Kissinger
still continued sending overtures to the Democratic
candidate, Hubert Humphreys, criticizing Nixon
and angling for the national security adviser job in
case of an upset.
Once in office, Nixon and Kissinger quickly
reacted to a North Vietnamese offensive by bombing enemy bases in neutral Cambodia. The plan was
justifiable in military terms, but to avoid rousing
public opinion and to test diplomatic reactions, it
was not revealed to, or approved by, Congress.
(However, when the House Judiciary Committee

Kissinger, Henry

President Richard Nixon in deep discussion with adviser Henry Kissinger. Kissinger was the principal architect of U.S.
foreign policy during the administrations of Republican presidents Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford. He served as
national security adviser during the first Nixon administration and secretary of state from 1972 until the end of the Ford
administration, the first foreign-born person to hold that position. (National Archives)

voted to impeach Nixon in 1973, it refused to
endorse an article citing the secret bombing.) News
of the secret bombing quickly leaked to the press,
with a full description appearing in the New York
Times on 9 May 1969. Nixon and Kissinger, who
were both secretive and suspicious of others,
reacted in what was to become a typical manner by
angrily demanding to know who leaked the report.
J. Edgar Hoover was summoned and Kissinger
agreed to a list of suspects, eventually totaling thirteen government officials and four journalists,
including close friends and staff, whose phones
were then bugged. Kissinger has subsequently tried
to play down his role in these “Kissinger taps,” while
arguing that they were justified because of national

security. However, they were run outside of the
normal FBI channels, with no official records kept
and summaries sent straight to Kissinger until May
1970, when Nixon decided that the White House
should receive them instead. The taps ran until
February 1971 and they were the first of the political wiretaps that came to characterize Nixon’s presidency. They were also cited as evidence in the
House Judicial Committee’s decision to recommend Nixon’s impeachment.
Kissinger’s temper and his ability to provoke
Nixon were most noticeably shown over the Pentagon Papers. When this huge study of the Vietnam
War was leaked to the press, Kissinger was enraged,
as it threatened to undermine his secret negotia411

Know-Nothings

tions with China. His mood was darkened even further when the leak was revealed to be Daniel Ellsberg, a former student and aide of his. Kissinger
denounced Ellsberg to Nixon as a drug-fueled
eccentric who enjoyed taking potshots at Vietnamese civilians, and so enraged the president that
he supported action that led to an illegal break-in of
Ellsberg’s psychiatrist’s office. When the judge at
Ellsberg’s trial in 1972 learned of the break-in and
of recordings of Ellsberg on the “Kissinger taps,” he
dismissed all of the charges against the defendant.
Kissinger’s and Nixon’s heightened paranoia following the Cambodia bombing leaks meant that they
soon cut all but a few others out of foreign policy discussions. National Security Council staff members
were reduced to guessing what was happening by
watching the limousines coming to the White
House. Kissinger even told his staff to keep an eye
on his chief of staff, General Alexander Haig, who
was said to listen secretly to Kissinger’s phone calls.
In December 1971, another of Kissinger’s aides,
navy yeoman Charles Radford, was also discovered
to be secretly photocopying documents and passing
them on to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Admiral Thomas Moorer. This had a dramatic effect
within the White House, with Kissinger demanding
action and threatening to quit. However, the incident was so embarrassing that nothing happened
except for more wiretaps and yet more secrecy.
Eventually, it was estimated that only seven people
including Nixon really knew what was happening in
Vietnam. None of them were in the cabinet.
Since leaving office, Kissinger has become one of
the most respected elder statesmen in the United
States. Partly through good self-publicity, such as
his voluminous memoirs, he has won much respect
for some of his actions during the Nixon presidency,
including his role in the recognition of China. Typically, this involved a fair amount of duplicity as few
in the administration knew about Kissinger’s visit to
Peking until Nixon dramatically revealed it to the
nation. Kissinger also won the Nobel Peace Prize
for his role in the 1972 Vietnam peace talks, even
though they led to little more than a brief cessation
in the war. His prolonged efforts to secure détente
with the Soviet Union were more successful, as was
412

his role during Watergate. The scandal only indirectly involved him, and he was portrayed as holding the presidency together, running foreign policy,
and edging Nixon toward resignation.
Neil Denslow
See also: Cambodia, Secret Bombing of; Hoover, J.
Edgar; Liddy, G. Gordon; Nixon, Richard; Pentagon
Papers; Watergate.
References
Hitchens, Christopher. 2001. The Trial of Henry
Kissinger. New York: Verso Books.
Isaacson, Walter. 1992. Kissinger: A Biography. New
York: Simon and Schuster.
Kissinger, Henry. 1979. The White House Years.
Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
———. 1982. Years of Upheaval. Boston, MA:
Little, Brown.
———. 1999. Years of Renewal. New York: Simon
and Schuster.

Know-Nothings
The American Party, or Know-Nothing Party,
developed in the context of the increasing sectional
tensions that led to the Civil War. An exclusive,
native Protestant, anti-immigrant, and anti-Catholic
organization, it stemmed from the nativist movement and from the anxiety caused by the massive
influx of immigrants, reaching its peak in the 1850s.
The Papal Plot
Foreign immigration led many conservatives to
believe that the nation’s social and even political ills
could be solved by the elimination of foreign influence. The country had experienced an unprecedented flow of immigrants in the mid-nineteenth
century, reaching dazzling numbers. From 1841 to
1860, more than 4 million immigrants arrived, with
two notable peaks: 369,980 in 1850 and 379,000 in
1851, the majority of whom were Irish (1.2 million)
and German (more than a million). In cities such as
Chicago, Milwaukee, New York, and St. Louis,
immigrants outnumbered native-born citizens.
Many feared the impact on the very fabric of the
United States of such large groups, impoverished,
ignorant, disease ridden, and alien in their religion
and languages. From a political point of view, many

Know-Nothings

traditional parties were distressed by the growing
political influence of those groups in big cities,
especially Catholics, since many of these immigrants tended to be manipulated by urban democratic political machines.
Consequently, there developed a strong belief in
a papal plot to subvert U.S. values and even destroy
U.S. institutions and cultural homogeneity. In addition, Catholics were deemed unfit to live in a republic and unpatriotic because they owed allegiance to
the pope. The Irish were especially blamed as tools
used by the pope to control U.S. religious and political life. Moreover, the great number of Catholics
moving to the Midwest caused the Know-Nothings
and other nativists to think that the power of the
pope might be transferred there.
By the end of the 1840s, several nativist secret
societies were formed to protect and save the country, supposedly threatened by an alien menace. In
1849, Charles Allen, a New Yorker, formed a secret
fraternal society made up of native-born Protestant
working men, artisans, and small businessmen, who
feared economic competition from cheaper immigrant labor. It was called the Order of the StarSpangled Banner, and evolved into a secret political
movement (with a formal pledge of secrecy) known
as the American Party, formed in 1854 by delegates
from thirteen states. If questioned, members were
required to say, “I know nothing,” hence the popular appellation. They pledged never to vote for any
foreign-born or Catholic candidate.
Know-Nothings made wide use of newspapers
and periodicals for their propaganda, together with
a network of activists from Boston to the Mississippi
Valley. Some predicted that the pope and his army
would land on U.S. shores to set up a new Vatican
in Cincinnati, Ohio. One famous Know-Nothing
was Samuel Morse, the inventor of the telegraph,
who wrote a series of articles denouncing a “foreign conspiracy.” Another was Lyman Beecher, a
seventh-generation Puritan preacher. Intent on
stopping the West from becoming Catholic country,
he wrote that he came to Cincinnati “to battle the
Pope for the garden spot of the world.” Mob attacks
on Catholic churches in New England soon became
frequent.

Popularity without Long-lasting Results
In practice, the Know-Nothings’ political aims were
not so much to suppress immigration, nor even
restrict it—although some sponsored resolutions to
bar paupers and criminals—but to control the influence of foreigners and “purify” U.S. politics. Their
legislative program called for the exclusion of foreigners and Catholics from public office, for more
stringent naturalization laws (extension of the residency period before naturalization from five to
twenty-one years), for literacy tests as a prerequisite
for voting, and for restrictions on liquor sales.
The Know-Nothings capitalized on the Compromise of 1850 and the furor over “Bleeding Kansas,”
which led to a fundamental political realignment in
the mid-1850s, winning national prominence chiefly
because the two major parties—Whigs and Democrats—were at that time breaking apart over the slavery issue. By 1855 they had captured control of the
legislatures in parts of New England and were the
dominant opposition party to the Democrats in New
York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Tennessee,
Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana.
In the presidential election of 1856, the party, by
then mainly composed of southerners as a result of
the internal debates over slavery, supported former
Whig president Millard Fillmore with a simplistic
platform—reputedly the shortest in U.S. history:
“America must rule America.” When the vote was
counted, Fillmore gathered nearly one million popular votes (21 percent of the popular vote) and eight
electoral votes. In Congress, the party had five senators and forty-three representatives.
Afterwards, Know-Nothingism declined for internal reasons: lack of efficient organization, the sudden decline in immigration, the failure to push any
legislation against immigration and Catholics, disagreement over secrecy, and the mounting violence
of its supporters (rioting and bloodshed took place
during the elections). The slavery issue broke down
the party, as was the case for the Whigs and the
Democrats. In 1855, at the party’s first convention in
Philadelphia, when southern delegates pushed a resolution to support the Kansas-Nebraska Act, northern delegates left the room. While northern workers
felt more threatened by the southern Slave Power
413

Koch Brothers

than by the pope and Catholic immigrants, at the
same time, fewer southerners were willing to support a party that ignored the question of the expansion of slavery. By 1860, many members and sympathizers joined the ranks of the growing Republican
Party with a political platform based on free soil. In
fact, both parties overlapped ideologically; their supporters both believed in conspiracy, one being the
pope’s, the other the slaveholders’. However, historians have debated whether the inevitability of the
Know-Nothings’ decline in favor of Republicanism
was because the papal plot was less plausible than
the slaveholders’ conspiracy.
The anti-immigration stance of the party was
condemned by many Americans, like Abraham Lincoln, who frowned on their discriminatory and
exclusionist philosophy as betraying such sacred
U.S. values as equality and hospitality to immigrants; or William H. Seward, who attacked their
failure to see that U.S. economic development
required immigrants. In 1855, Abraham Lincoln
wrote in a private letter: “I am not a KnowNothing. . . . As a nation we began by declaring that
‘all men are created equal.’ We now practically read
it ‘all men are created equal, except negroes.’ When
the Know-Nothings get control, it will read ‘all men
are created equal, except negroes, and foreigners,
and catholics.’”
The Know-Nothings left an indelible mark on
U.S. politics. The movement eroded loyalty to the
national political parties, was instrumental in the
breakdown of the Whig Party, and made the political system more fragile before the divisive issue of
slavery.
Aïssatou Sy-Wonyu
See also: Anti-Catholicism; Nativism; Slave Power.
References
Anbinder, Tyler. 1992. Nativism and Slavery: The
Northern Know-Nothings and the Politics of the
1850s. New York: Oxford University Press.
Beals, Carleton. 1960. Brass-Knuckle Crusade. The
Great Know-Nothing Conspiracy. 1820–1860.
New York: Hastings House.
Billington, Ray A. [1938] 1964. The Protestant
Crusade, 1800–1860. New York: Rinehart.
———. 1979. The Origins of Nativism in the United
States, 1800–1844. New York: Arno.

414

Brown, Thomas. 1985. Politics and Statesmanship:
Essays on the American Whig Party. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Gienapp, William E. 1988. The Origins of the
Republican Party, 1852–1856. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Overdyke, William Darrell. [1950] 1968. The KnowNothing Party in the South. Gloucester, MA:
Peter Smith.

Koch Brothers
Charles G. Koch, CEO of Koch Industries Inc. (KII),
and younger brother William I. Koch, president of
the Oxbow Corporation, pursued each other through
thirty years of mutual conspiracy accusations that
ultimately centered on the oil industry’s ability to
influence government actions through campaign
contributions.
Control of Kansas-based KII, the second-largest
privately held company in the United States, was
divided in 1967 among the four sons of ardent libertarian Fred Chase Koch: Frederick (b. 1932),
Charles (b. 1935), and twins David and William (b.
1940). In 1983, KII bought the shares of William,
Frederick, and their allies following a 1980 attempt
to oust Charles as CEO. Dissatisfied with the deal,
William eventually brought more than two dozen
legal actions for fraud, conspiracy, and racketeering;
most failed. Internal KII beliefs that William’s conspiracy charges were themselves part of an anti-KII
conspiracy gained support in July 1999, when the
New York Times reported that William hired private
investigators to pose as journalists to get inside
information from KII.
William Koch’s only successful lawsuit was a Qui
Tam action—an individual suit on behalf of the federal government—charging that Koch Industries
had conspired to steal oil from Osage lands. This suit
followed a 1988 Senate investigation that was
dropped at the behest of Republican senators Bob
Dole and Nancy Kassenbaum of Kansas, Don Nickles of Oklahoma, and Democratic senator David
Boren of Oklahoma. Using Federal Election Commission (FEC) data, an article in the Nation asserted
that all four were beneficiaries of Koch political contributions; the article also alleged that a 1989 FBI

Ku Klux Klan

case summary said there was probable cause to prosecute KII (Perry). A 1999 jury trial found KII guilty.
Questions of political influence arose again in a
1998 Senate investigation that suggested that
Charles and David had evaded campaign spending
limits in 1996 by funneling $1.3 million through the
Economic Education Trust (EET) to conservative
consulting group Triad Management Services. No
subpoena was issued for EET’s financial records,
and the New York Times alleged that Senator Nickles blocked further investigation. In legitimate campaign financing, KII became the second largest
political contributor in the energy industry in
1997–1998, with 90 percent of its donations going to
Republican causes. Self-styled “Renaissance Man”
William was the forty-sixth largest source of Democratic soft money in the same time period, putting
him in a league with Bell Atlantic and Federal
Express.
Party rivalries came to a head shortly before the
2000 elections. In August 2000, KII was indicted on
ninety-seven felony counts for violating emission
standards for cancer-causing benzene at its Corpus
Christi, Texas, oil refinery. While the Al Gore campaign told the Washington Post that KII’s environmental performance showed how the oil industry
was buying influence with then-governor George
W. Bush, the Daily Oklahoman argued that the
indictment had been timed to discredit the Bush
campaign. In April 2001, the charges were reduced
to a single count, and KII agreed to pay $20 million
in penalties.
Although a terse joint memo, dated 25 May 2001,
announced the end of all litigation between KII and
the Oxbow Corporation, the 1983 buyout cast a long
shadow. In January 2001, former Playmate Anna
Nicole Smith sued KII for conspiring with her stepson E. Pierce Marshall to deny her $474 million in
KII stock owned by her late husband, J. Howard
Marshall II. The elder Marshall had disinherited son
J. Howard Marshall III for backing William in 1980.
In earlier legal battles over the estate, a probate
judge was removed from the case for having previously taken trips that were partly funded by a Koch
foundation as part of a judge education program.
Wende Vyborney Feller

See also: Libertarianism; Oil Industry.
References
Daily Oklahoman. 2000. “Clinton-Gore Justice:
Bizarro.” 9 August.
Frantz, Douglas. 1999. “Journalists or Detectives?
Depends on Who’s Asking.” New York Times, 28
July.
Koch Industries and Oxbow Corporation. 2001.
“Koch Industries and Oxbow Corporation
Terminate Litigation.” Press release, 25 May.
Murphy, Bill. 2001. “Tape Details Dispute between
Marshalls.” Houston Chronicle, 27 February. 2
star edition.
Nissimov, Ron. 1999. “Probate Judge’s Trip Turns
into Trouble; Hearing Held to Remove Jurist
from Battle over Oilman’s Millions.” Houston
Chronicle, 15 September. 3 star edition.
Perry, Robert. 1996. “D(oil)e: What Wouldn’t Bob
Do for Koch Oil?” Nation, 26 August.
U.S. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs.
1998. Investigation of Illegal or Improper
Activities in Connection with the 1996 Federal
Election Campaigns. 105th Cong., 2d sess.,
Washington DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Washington Post. 2000. “Alleged Texas Polluter Is
Indicted; Charges against Pipeline Firm Quickly
Become Campaign Issue.” 29 September, final
edition.
Wayne, Leslie. 1997. “Papers Link Donations to 2
on Senate Hearings Panel.” New York Times, 30
October.
Websites
Koch Industries, Inc: http://www.kochind.com.
The Oxbow Group: http://www.oxbow.com.

Ku Klux Klan
While the scale of Ku Klux Klan (KKK) activity has
fluctuated through history and its nature has varied
across geography, Klansmen have always framed
their enemies in conspiratorial terms. Accordingly,
the character, methods, and motivation of the Klan’s
enemies have varied in the conspiracy theories that
Klansmen have promulgated during different historical periods and in different places. Nevertheless, logical patterns in the historical development
of their conspiratorial theories are evident. Beginning with the first Klan groups of the 1860s, KKK
conspiracy theories have repeatedly opposed economic, social, and political changes that threatened,
415

Ku Klux Klan

undermined, or overturned the power of white
supremacy in U.S. society.
Diabolical Republicans:
Reconstruction-Era Klan Ideology
During 1866–1871, a faction of “Radical Republicans” adopted the political strategy of granting citizenship, legal protection, militia membership, and
voting rights to the recently freed slaves, in order to
create an electorate that would support their
nationalistic and liberal-capitalist project. To southern Democrats, black enfranchisement meant that
intelligent, virtuous, and patriotic government was
succumbing to ignorance, stupidity, thievery, and
vice. To counter the Republicans, agents of the
Democratic Party revived the tradition of the prewar “regulators” and slave patrols. Secretive ritual
fraternities, quickly subsumed under the label Ku
Klux Klan, endeavored to destroy the Republican
Party infrastructure and reestablish control over
credit, the transportation of cotton, and black labor.
More generally, they aimed to restore racial subordination in all aspects of political, economic, and
social life.
The Ku Klux Klans, as well as the Democratic
Party mouthpieces that supported their terrorist
operations, raised alarms that “diabolical” Union
Leagues were conspiring to reduce the South to
“Negro domination” (Trelease, xxx). Enfranchisement of blacks undertaken by a “New England conclave . . . lorded over by Beelzebub of the fallen”
had brought the state “under the domain of Negro
supremacy” (Nelson, 89). Founded upon “malice
and cowardly hatred . . . for the white inhabitants of
the South” and a “desire to maintain power at the
cost of principal and honor,” the Republicans were
inflicting an “outrage on liberty and free government.” They were implementing “despotic” measures to “supercede State authority with the government of the bayonet” (Trelease, 390).
Breaches of deferential behavior and decorum
threatened to disrupt the entire fabric of white
supremacy. The arrival of Yankee troops in the
South had aroused “insolence, impertinence, impudence and ingratitude” among the former slaves
(Litwack, 144). Black parades were deemed “outra416

geous spectacles.” Petty theft and consumption of
alcohol prepared the way for insurrection. Exceptional and isolated cases of violence against former
masters were sensationalized: black assassins had
killed overseers and armed groups of slaves had terrorized the white populace, seizing plantations to
parcel out among themselves. Insubordination and
disregard of curfews were characterized as “insurrection” and refusal to work was defined as
“mutiny” (Litwack, 148). Blacks were being incited
to rape and rapine at Republican meetings. Klansmen proclaimed that Republican Party Union
Leagues were responsible for stimulating a bloody
and terrible wave of assault, arson, and murder. The
South was being reduced to anarchy because vindictive Republican judges dealt lightly with Union
League criminals. Open talk of acquiring land and
voting became incitement to race war.
The Democratic press also printed lurid tales that
Republicans who lived on terms of equality with
blacks were engaging in “cohabitation . . . accompanied by the most unbridled and groveling licentiousness” (Nelson, 135). Tales of Republican
depravity were linked to images of threatening black
men and, through metaphors of theft, violence, and
putrefaction, to the financial decline of southern
towns. Complex changes in transportation, credit,
and shipping technology were transformed into a
simple, racist explanation for southern poverty. Yankee speculators, like a horde of locusts, had descended to prey upon the South through the political manipulation of gullible freemen. The “invasion”
of Republican-sponsored interstate railroads were
likened to political “machines” and “rings” (Nelson,
4; 113; 135). The new railroad lines that passed from
Virginia to Georgia were seen as engines of corruption whereby Yankee speculators who had bought
black votes imported women and liquor to influence
legislators (Nelson, 86–87; 98).
The greatest ambition of enfranchised blacks,
Klansmen claimed, was to coerce white women into
sexual favors and intermarriage. The ensuing “amalgamation” of the races, it was claimed, would create
a race of mulattos. The South would “be ruled out
of the family of white nations” (Litwack, 265; Trelease, xxxvii). Conflating sexual fear and partisan

Ku Klux Klan

politics, Klansmen posed as chivalrous avengers:
vindictive Republicans were represented as
unleashing lust-crazed savages upon war widows
and defenseless virgins. Since white womanhood
symbolized the heart of culture and refinement,
their ravishment by animalistic black men represented in the minds of the Klan the destruction of
the South as a whole: an assault on either connoted
an implicit carnal attack on the other.
Although localized and lacking synchronization,
Ku Klux Klan violence, including uncounted whippings, beatings and rapes, murders, and massacres,
played a major role in disarming black militia and
preventing black voting in at least eight states.
Republican parties were destroyed at the local level
and in many cities, while Georgia and Louisiana
were entirely “redeemed.” The Republican Congress, in turn, passed a series of Federal Enforcement Acts enabling military intervention, suspension of the writ of habeas corpus, and enough
indictments and convictions to break the back of
the Klans in 1872. By this point, however, the Klans
had served their purpose.
After 1863 the federal government lost the will to
maintain Reconstruction. Interracial state governments steadily collapsed in the face of intimidation
at the polls by white paramilitaries, open intimidation by mobs, and pogroms against black communities. Although paramilitary groups—such as the
“whitecappers” who drove off independent black
farmers in Mississippi during 1892–1893 and again
a decade later—were occasionally revived, lynching
and the implementation of legal segregation served
to maintain a rigid caste system in the South.
The Second Ku Klux Klan:
A Catholic Conspiracy
Claiming to have received a mystical vision that had
instructed him to unite native-born white Protestant men in battle against aliens, radicals, political
corruption, prostitution, and religious infidelity,
William Simmons revived the KKK in 1915. His
Klansmen harassed presumed slackers, enemy
aliens, and immoral women. By the mid-1920s, the
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan had become a
national, predominantly urban, mainstream social

movement of 4 million members who represented
a generally balanced cross section of white Protestant denominations and social classes. While racist
ideology and vigilante violence continued to characterize Klaverns in the South and Southwest, as
the order moved into regions and communities
with no history of vigilantism or in which the black
population was small, different concerns shaped
Klavern activity.
In the context of the time, these Klansmen were
not more reactionary, racist, ethnocentric, religiously bigoted, or socially alienated than the general white Protestant population. United by a commitment to civic activism and social order, however,
Klansmen were more likely to express and act upon
their concerns: curtailment of vice; open and honest government; modern roads, sewage systems,
and schools; enforcement of conservative Protestant morality, especially Prohibition; and Protestant
control of the public schools.
What differentiated the Knights of the Ku Klux
Klan from other reactions to disruptive change was
the conspiratorial outlook and bellicosity that continued to permeate their worldview. While Klansmen
had employed conspiracy theory and countersubversive rhetoric during Reconstruction, the primary
enemy whom many deemed responsible for subverting their world had changed, probably because of
the new geographical contexts in which the Klan was
now operating. Akin to the carpetbaggers of Reconstruction lore, Catholics and, to a lesser extent, Jews
now played the role of concrete, alien conspirators in
the Second Ku Klux Klan’s ideology.
Enough Americans agreed with Klan leader
Hiram Evans that “We must teach alien peoples the
fundamental principals of human liberty before we
can permit further masses of ignorant, superstitious
religious devotees to come within our borders” that
Congress would pass a highly restrictive immigration bill in 1924 (Feldman, 53). They may also have
agreed that Catholics owned houses of prostitution
and committed a disproportionate number of
crimes. Non-Klansmen probably gave less credence,
however, to Evans’s warnings that “the Dago on the
Tiber,” Jesuit assassins, and the Knights of Columbus were stockpiling arms in Catholic churches, in
417

Ku Klux Klan

preparation for a merciless massacre of U.S. Protestants and a papist takeover of the federal government (Blee, 92).
Klansmen distributed phony literature that
endorsed candidates seeking to “Catholicize” the
United States (Rhomberg). Using spurious statistics, they argued that increasing Catholic power
threatened the separation of church and state.
Catholic priests were adjudged to be “foreign emissaries operating in the United States” (Wade, 179).
Catholic control of the press, organized labor, and
the public schools, combined with the control of
“polyglot peoples” by Catholic political machines,
was enabling the “hierarchical church [to spread] its
tentacles, like an octopus, into the very vitals of the
body politic” (Bennett, 214–215). Klansmen declared that they were fighting “to maintain a free
republican form of government against the subtle
political encroachments of the self arrogated, infallible, universal autocracy known as the Roman
Catholic hierarchy” (MacLean, 95). Catholics, they
maintained, were imbued with the “monarchical
ideal of the individual as subject instead of citizen.”
The Knights of Columbus was charged with training and equipping an army bent on conquest for
Rome. Papist agents, Klansmen warned, had poisoned President Warren G. Harding and put hidden
religious symbols on the dollar bill, in preparation
for the pope’s arrival in the United States. Klan
recruiters displayed photographs of the Episcopal
church on Mount Alban, in Washington, D.C., to
claim that a new Vatican was under construction.
Indiana Klansmen asserted that every time a male
child was born, the congregation buried a rifle
beneath a Catholic church and that church steeples
were built high so that Catholics could “rain down
fire on cities after the Pope declared war on Protestants” (Wade, 226). The sewer system under Notre
Dame University was said to contain an arsenal of
heavy artillery and explosives. The KKK circulated a
phony Knights of Columbus Oath, a pledge to
“hang, burn, boil, flay, and bury alive” all nonCatholics (Chalmers, 111). Such propagandizing
was effective in rousing public vigilance. KKK antiCatholicism also focused on the theme of lechery. In
North Manchester, Indiana, nearly 1,500 people
418

turned out to ambush the pope, said to be arriving
by train. Catholic stores were boycotted and
Catholics were dismissed from schools and hospital
boards in other parts of the state.
While the Klan decried Jewish violation of the
Sabbath and accused Jews of trying to take the Bible
out of the public schools, the Klan’s antisemitism
dwelled on economic and social themes more than
religious ones. Depending on local economy and
tangible property, Klansmen charged the “International Jew” with “cosmopolitanism” (MacLean,
138). Portraying exploitation, destructive competition, and economic concentration as unnatural
anomalies caused by the perfidy of a small minority,
Klansmen upheld “good,” small-scale capitalism.
Enlisting the infamous czarist police forgery Protocols of the Elders of Zion, Klansmen, like other antisemites of the 1920s, described bolshevism as Jewish controlled and Jewish financed. The regime, in
promoting female equality, divorce, and “free love,”
had in their view nationalized women. “Hebrew libertines” were deemed the secret force behind the
white slave trade and a popular culture that was
bringing moral ruin upon the nation’s youth (Blee,
87).
Although the specific enemies were different
from those of their Reconstruction-era ancestors,
1920s Klansmen also attacked alien outsiders in
woman’s name. They employed a similar rhetoric
concerning gender and sexuality to illustrate political
concerns. Recitations of sexual subversion by Communists, Catholics, and Jews centered on charges
that each would recast the family and morality,
destroying civilization.
The Klan’s appeal to middle-class fears about
female sexuality was a highly effective recruiting
technique, yet it ultimately proved precarious. The
irony of the Second Ku Klux Klan is that its leadership fell victim to same type of scandal that had motivated rank-and-file Klansmen to join the order. In
1925, Indiana Klan leader D. C. Stephenson, in an
alcoholic frenzy, raped, bit, and brutalized a twentyeight-year-old neighbor whom he had been courting.
During his trial another woman sued Stephenson for
desertion and child support. Throughout the nation,
Klansmen resigned in disgust. Scandal also rocked

Ku Klux Klan

other realms. In LaGrande, Oregon, a Klansman was
convicted of performing an illegal abortion on a clerical assistant with whom he had been engaging in
sexual relations. In Denver, members of the American Legion raided the offices of the Klan vice squad
and uncovered a complex network of tip-offs, graft,
and protection. More generally, the Klan’s ultimate
failure to enforce Prohibition led to disillusionment
throughout the nation.
In the South, however, Klan activity never disappeared. Here, racist rhetoric remained apocalyptic,
since it was believed that the slightest concession
would embolden blacks to undermine the whole
apparatus of white supremacy. Klansmen continued
to warn of “indigestible races,” “mongrel populations,” “defiled blood,” and “racial pollution” as
threats to the body politic (MacLean, 141). Here too,
where Klansmen saw themselves as an army in training for a war between the races, there was pervasive
extralegal coercion and violence. Lynching, flogging
with rawhide straps, and other forms of vigilante violence were employed to terrorize African Americans,
labor organizers, and people who broke moral codes.
From Anticommunism to Antisemitism:
The Klan after World War II
As economic destitution, unionization, and New
Deal programs combined to undermine white
supremacy in the South during the 1930s, Klansmen
fused racism with anticommunism and antifederal
government rhetoric. As Franklin D. Roosevelt
redefined U.S. liberalism in terms of active government and a welfare state, Klansmen charged that he
was subverting U.S. principles and destroying the
foundations of states’ rights. The political alliance
forged between the New Deal and the labor movement provided Communists with an opportunity to
establish a legitimate role, providing ammunition for
the administration’s enemies. Anticipating the anticommunism of the early cold war, Klan Wizard
Evans was one of the first to charge that the Congress of Industrial Organizations “is infested with
communists” (Wade, 262). In Alabama and Georgia,
urban police, rural sheriffs, and Klansmen worked
together to terrorize Communist Party organizers.
Northern anti-union corporations also employed

vigilantes to flog union men. World War II, however,
provided a new context for activism in the South as
African Americans, liberals, and labor organizers
linked white supremacy to Nazi racial policies.
Nevertheless, Klansmen posed as guardians
against Communist subversion, in a context where
the term “communism” was used by many southerners to describe almost anyone who did not
exhibit strict orthodoxy on the racial issue. Southern
segregationists continued to maintain that civil
rights activists intended intermarriage and destruction of the white race through “mongrelization.”
Klansmen, however, concluded that the real force
behind these changes was the international Communist conspiracy. Klansmen labeled Martin
Luther King, Jr., a “rabble rousing nigger Communist,” and asserted that Rosa Parks was a Communist agent (Rich, 68–69). They believed that the
ultimate aim of these Communists was the destruction of tradition in order to pave the way for their
takeover of the United States. Their plan involved
the gradual weakening of the moral fiber of the
nation until it disintegrated from within.
Antisemitism played an ambiguous role in KKK
anticommunist rhetoric: Jews formed a sort of continuum between the racial threat of blacks and the
ideological threat of Communists. As Alabama
Klansman E. L. Edwards put it, “The good niggers
don’t want this integration any more than we do. It
is the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] that is trying to jam
it down our throats and it is backed by Jew money.”
It was, he said, “Russia’s intention to Mongrelize
the world, to mix the white race with the black so as
to bring it under Communist control.” Jewish Communists were credited with providing the brains
and the driving force behind integration, yet most
Klansmen still adhered to a religious view of Jewish
difference. Robert Shelton, leader of the largest
Klan organization of the 1960s, blamed international Jewish financiers for World War I and the
Great Depression, but he also went so far as to say
that if Jews converted to Christianity, they would be
welcomed into the Klan. Other Klansmen declared
that Jewish biology expressed itself through the
“Jewish” ideology of communism.
419

Ku Klux Klan

Some postwar Klan leaders, however, would
come to view Jews as an enemy of the white race
because of who they were and not only for what they
did. Elaborating upon the themes of Protocols of
the Elders of Zion, a number of postwar Klan organizations would expand and develop antisemitism in
such a way that it eventually emerged as an allencompassing conspiracy theory in Klan ideology.
The White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan of Mississippi, the most violent Klan organization of the
1960s, saw the Jews as the major destructive force
in the United States. White Knights leader Samuel
Bowers delivered religious sermons lambasting
Jews as the “anti-Christ” and “Demons of the Synagogue of Satan” (Rich, 74). For him, the preservation of a constitutional republic was a means to an
end: the preservation of Christian civilization.
It was this sort of dualistic antisemitism that would
help create a revolutionary impulse during the late
1960s. Some of the most militant White Knights, as
well as members of the United Florida Ku Klux
Klan, also joined the National States Rights Party
(NSRP), a small but active group of vehement antisemites who excoriated the “Federal Bureau of Integration” as a tool of the Jews. Influenced by the
Christian Identity preaching of Weseley Swift,
NSRP ideology was “forward looking” in the context
of ideological development on the racist right.
In the 1970s, many Klansmen would be converted to the ideas of historical revisionism and
Christian Identity. Historical revisionism held that
the Holocaust was a figment of the Jewish imagination, a lie that had been concocted to gain the
necessary sympathy for the creation of the State of
Israel. Christian Identity theology provided Klansmen with an eschatology that viewed Aryans as the
true Israelites, as God’s chosen people. According
to the “seedline” interpretation of Genesis, blacks
and other “mud people” were the result of a separate creation, given to whites by God as “beasts of
the fields” (Rich, 291–296). Jews, however, were
quite literally evil personified, having sprung from
sexual intercourse between Eve and Satan in the
Garden of Eden. Convinced of the inherent evil of
Jews, and believing that Jews had taken over the

420

United States, some Klansmen concluded they
must wage a holy war to reclaim their nation from
the “Zionist Occupation Government” (Rich,
363–369).
In the 1960s, although some tiny groups of
Klansmen in northeastern states affiliated with
George Lincoln Rockwell’s American Nazi Party,
the great majority of Klansmen, many of whom
would have fought in World War II, rejected
Nazism as a totalitarian, anticapitalist, un-Christian
form of tyranny. Before the mid-1960s, moreover,
the largest Ku Klux Klan organization in the United
States, Robert Shelton’s UKA (United Klans of
America) respected, identified with, and even
revered the Federal Bureau of Investigation and
the House Un-American Activities Committee.
Klansmen presumed that the FBI was a meritorious
ally in a common battle against un-American subversion. In 1965–1966, however, the House UnAmerican Activities Committee declared the Ku
Klux Klan to be un-American and exposed its terrorist activities. In response, Robert Shelton
asserted that “left-wing elements” were “using the
Klan as bait to destroy the Committee itself because
of its Southern membership” (Shelton).
Alluding to aggressive interviews by FBI agents
pursuing Klan murders in Alabama, Shelton also
declared that “the FBI and Justice Department have
harassed members of this Klan and other right-wing
organizations, causing them to lose their jobs” (Shelton). Yet he also reached out, offering that “it’s not
necessary for them to infiltrate. If they fill out an
application, they can do so and we’ll welcome them
into the Klan and have fraternal unionism” (Shelton). The United Klans, unlike the NSRP and the
White Knights, thus remained supportive of the system in that they presented illegitimate infiltration of
the government rather than the national security
state itself as the cause of their woes.
Between 1966 and 1971, however, the FBI accelerated its COINTELPRO–White Hate Groups program
against the Klans. Using prosecution under federal
law, media exposure, selective enforcement of misdemeanor law, tax audits, poison pen letters, informants, “snitch-jackets,” and other disruptive covert

Ku Klux Klan

action techniques, the FBI discredited a number of
top Klan leaders and replaced them with informants, created and aggravated internecine factionalism, and scared off most rank-and-file members,
thereby neutralizing Klan activity throughout the
South. By 1972, the UKA newspaper would declare:
“[The United States government] has been transformed [in]to a corrupt, unnatural and degenerate
monstrosity. . . . we need to put a bullet into its brain
and hammer a stake through its heart. If that means
blood and chaos and battling the alien enemy from
house to house in burning cities throughout the
land, then by God it is better that we get on with it
now than later” (United Klans of America).
A prelude to the so-called Nazification of the
KKK in the late 1970s, such statements marked a
significant transition in KKK conspiracy theory. By
the mid-1970s, conservative notions of nationalism
and masculinity had been challenged by the defeat
in Vietnam, economic decline, rising crime rates,
and feminism. According to the KKK, Jewish teachers had repressed expression of Christian faith in
public life and Jewish women had promoted feminism and lesbianism in a conspiracy to limit the
white birthrate. The welfare state, meanwhile, was
said to pay minorities to give birth to illegitimate offspring, who would grow up to a life of crime, even
as the Jewish media promoted immorality among all
Americans. This view held that the Zionist Occupation Government—a Jewish cabal that controlled
the intelligence community, finances and banking,
the media, and foreign policy—had brought war in
Vietnam, moral decay at home, and, through their
promotion of feminism, homosexuality, abortion,
the welfare state, and racial miscegenation, would
bring about the genocide of the white race.
In addition to adopting new countersubversive
discourses, Klan groups paramilitarized during the
1970s. For many racists, the paramilitary vigilante,
a new warrior hero, promised to resurrect a lost culture. In the 1960s, paramilitary training by Klansmen had been very limited and highly secretive. In
the 1980s, however, militant activists on the racist
right would reject hierarchical chains of command
in favor of a secretive cell structure. Putting words

into action, they enacted an insurrection against the
Zionist Occupation Government. As the leader of
The Order, a mixed group of neo-Nazis and Klansmen, put it in 1983:
“A secret war has been developing for the last
year between the regime in Washington and an ever
growing number of white people who are determined to regain what our forefathers discovered,
explored, settled, built and died for. . . . The FBI
has been able to keep this war secret only because
up until now we have been doing nothing more
than growing and preparing. The government, however, seems determined to force the issue. So we
have no choice left but to stand up and fight back.
Hail Victory!” (Mathews).
Klan ideology became revolutionary. The majority of white Americans had become “race-traitors”
(Beam).
After the Civil War, the Ku Klux Klan saw themselves as redeeming the South and southern womanhood from black-Republican conspirators. In the
1920s, they fought off papist conspiracies to subvert
the Republic and alien conspiracies to undermine
Protestant morality. Retreating back to the South in
the following decades, they fought against the international Communist conspiracy. After the mid1950s, however, white supremacy changed from
being an integral part of southern life into an
extremist ideology. As society changed around it,
Klansmen lost touch with the mainstream. Condemned today for their conspiratorial racism as well
as their violence, Klansmen have become un-American extremists.
John Drabble
See also: Anti-Catholicism; Antisemitism;

COINTELPRO; House Un-American Activities

Committee; Protocols of the Elders of Zion.
References
Bair, Fred, and V. L. Lamar. 1928. Does the USA
Need the KKK? Girard, KA: Haldeman-Julius.
Beam, Louis, Jr. 1983. Essays of a Klansman.
Hayden Lake, ID: A.K.I.A. Publications.
Blee, Kathleen. 1991. Women of the Klan: Racism
and Gender in the 1920s. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

421

Ku Klux Klan

Bennett, David H. 1988. The Party of Fear: From
Nativist Movements to the New Right in
American History. New York: Vintage Books.
Chalmers, David. 1981. Hooded Americanism: A
History of the KKK. New York: Franklin Watts.
Cook, Erza A. 1922. Ku Klux Klan Secrets Exposed!
Chicago, IL: Erza A. Cook.
Drabble, John. 1996. COINTELPRO–White Hate, the
FBI, and the Cold War Consensus. Ph.D. diss.,
University of California at Berkeley.
Evans, Hiram Wesley. 1926. “The Klan’s Fight for
Americanism.” North American Review, MarchApril-May.
Feldman, Glenn. 1996. The Ku Klux Klan in
Alabama, 1915–1954. Ph.D. diss., Auburn
University.
Fowler, C. Lewis. 1922. The Ku Klux Klan, Its
Origin, Meaning and Scope of Operation. Atlanta,
GA: C. L. Fowler.
Ingalls, Robert P. “Antiradical Violence in
Birmingham during the 1930s” Journal of
Southern History 47: 4.
Jackson, Kenneth T. 1967. The Ku Klux Klan in the
City, 1915–1930. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Jenkins, William D. “The Ku Klux Klan in
Youngstown, Ohio: Moral Reform in the
Twenties.” Historian 41: 76–93.
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan [H. W. Evans]. 1924.
“The Menace of Modern Immigration.” Knights
of the Ku Klux Klan Inc.
Lay, Shawn. 1992. The Invisible Empire in the West:
Toward a New Historical Understanding of the
Ku Klux Klan of the 1920s. Urbana: Illinois
University Press.
———. 1995. Hooded Knights on the Niagara: The
Ku Klux Klan in Buffalo. New York: New York
University Press.

422

Litwack, Leon F. 1979. Been in the Storm So Long:
The Aftermath of Slavery. New York: Vintage.
MacLean, Nancy. 1994. Beyond the Mask of
Chivalry: The Making of the Second Ku Klux
Klan. New York: Oxford University Press.
Mathews, Robert. 1984. Letter. Sandpoint Daily
Bee, 12 December.
Moore, Leonard J. 1991. Citizen Klansman: The Ku
Klux Klan in Indiana, 1921–1928. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press.
Nelson, Scott Reynolds. 1999. Iron Confederacies:
Southern Railways, Klan Violence and
Reconstruction. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press.
Newton, Michael and Judy Ann. 1991. The Ku Klux
Klan: An Encyclopedia. New York: Garland.
Rhomberg, Chris. “White Nativism and Urban
Politics: The 1920s Ku Klux Klan in Oakland,
California.” Journal of American Ethnic History
17: 2.
Rich, Evelyn. 1988. Ku Klux Klan Ideology
1954–1988. Ph.D. diss., Boston University.
Shelton, Robert M. 1965. Interview. Playboy,
August.
Trelease, Allen W. 1999. White Terror: The Ku Klux
Klan Conspiracy and Southern Reconstruction.
Baton Rouge: Louisiana University Press.
United Klans of America. 1972. “Why Revolution?”
Fiery Cross 7: 10.
U.S. House. 1965. Committee on Un-American
Activities. Hearings on Ku Klux Klan
Organizations. 89th Cong., 1st sess. Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
———. Report: The Present-Day Ku Klux Klan
Movement. 1967. 90th Cong., 1st sess. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Wade, Wyn Craig. 1987. The Fiery Cross: The Ku
Klux Klan in America. New York: Simon and
Schuster.

L
LaRouche, Lyndon
Lyndon Hermyle LaRouche, Jr., has had a long and
controversial career on the fringes of U.S. politics—
running several times for president in the 1970s,
1980s, and 1990s—and as the founder and leader of
a cultlike political organization that subscribes to a
host of conspiracy theories that defy categorization
as left or right wing.
Born in New Hampshire to French Canadian
immigrant parents in 1922, LaRouche was raised as
a Quaker, the liberal faith to which both his mother
(a former evangelical Protestant) and his father (born
a Roman Catholic) had converted. LaRouche’s father
never got along with the pacifist Quakers and had a
falling out with the church’s political wing—the
American Friends Service Committee—over some
embezzled funds. Both the father’s combativeness
and his alleged financial misdeeds would be repeated
in the son’s later political career.
While LaRouche the younger attended, but did
not graduate from, Northeastern University, he was
largely an autodidact, delving deeply into the works
of the great philosophers. He was, he later claimed,
particularly taken with the moral reasoning of
Immanuel Kant. True to his Quaker roots,
LaRouche was assigned to a Civilian Public Service
camp for conscientious objectors during World War
II. Following the conflict, he drifted toward the
Trotskyist left, joining the Socialist Workers Party
(SWP) in 1948.
While a dedicated organizer for the party for more
than fifteen years, LaRouche eventually had a

falling-out with his fellow Trotskyists in 1966, going
on to organize a chapter of the Progressive Labor
Party (PLP), a Maoist-leaning group. The PLP chapter, which included many former members of the
Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), a radical,
anti–Vietnam War movement, became involved in
the radical takeover of Columbia University in 1968.
In the wake of the sit-in, LaRouche organized the
National Caucus of Labor Committees (NCLC),
ostensibly to create a political alliance between student activists and labor organizers, out of the collapsing SDS.
During the early 1970s, LaRouche and the NCLC
fought bitter sectarian fights with the SWP and the
Communist Party of the U.S.A. (CPUSA) that occasionally became violent. The goal was control of the
far left movement in New York and, in this struggle,
LaRouche began to develop the two tactics that
would mark his future political career. The first was
smear tactics, the careful planting of outlandish
rumors and stories about political enemies.
LaRouche would later go on to attack the personal
reputations of widely disparate public figures from
former secretary of state Henry Kissinger to liberal
Playboy publisher Hugh Hefner. The second was
mind control. Beginning in 1973, LaRouche established mandatory “ego-stripping” sessions for all
NCLC chapters, where psychological humiliation
was employed to bind members to the organization.
Along with the psychological manipulation came
indoctrination in the LaRouche worldview, which
combined various conspiracy theories with a cult423

Leisler’s Rebellion

like belief in the leadership and genius of LaRouche
himself. LaRouche’s conspiracy theory was global in
scope. In it, humanity was essentially divided into
three camps: the “oligarchs,” the “sub-humans,” and
the “humanists.” The oligarchs were those who
secretly manipulated world events; the sub-humans
were the vast majority of humanity who had no idea
what was going on; and the humanists—the followers of LaRouche—were those nobly fighting to
expose the oligarchs.
As LaRouche drifted from left to right and back
again, the composition of the oligarchs was wide
ranging and included, among other institutions, the
United Nations, the National Council of Churches,
the Women’s Christian Temperance Union, and the
British royal family, the latter largely responsible,
argued LaRouche, for the world drug trade. In addition, LaRouche pointed an accusing finger at more
traditional targets of U.S. conspiratorial thinking—
the Trilateralists, the Federal Reserve Board, and the
Zionist movement. If the objects of LaRouche’s conspiratorial thinking ranged widely, their aim was simple: genocide. As LaRouche had it, the aim of the oligarchs is to reduce world population to under one
billion so they can thereby more easily continue their
domain over the planet. Even as LaRouche was formulating his conspiratorial worldview, his organization—the NCLC had spun off the U.S. Labor Party
(USLP) in 1971—was delving into electoral politics.
In 1976, its peak year, the USLP ran 140 candidates
in 21 states—including LaRouche for president—
but only received a paltry 154,000 votes. Disbanding
the party in 1978, LaRouche and his followers—now
numbering several hundred—began conducting a
“stealth” campaign within the Democratic Party. In
1986, LaRouche followers took the Democratic
nomination for lieutenant governor and secretary of
state in Illinois. Denounced by the head of their
ticket—Democratic gubernatorial candidate Adlai
Stevenson III—both candidates lost, however.
The large sums of money LaRouche spent on politicking—including expensive nationally run commercials for his presidential candidacies in the
1980s—came from several sources. One was intelligence gathering. LaRouche’s publication, Executive
Intelligence Review, with its mix of officially leaked
424

news and insider scuttlebutt, was widely subscribed
to in Reagan-era Washington. A second source of
money came from LaRouche’s followers themselves.
As with many, more religiously oriented cults,
LaRouche acolytes—many of whom were college
graduates and young professionals—were required
to turn over their worldly assets and live lives of
penury for the good of the organization.
Last, the LaRouche organization operated a
right-wing boiler room fund-raising operation that
would often play on the fears of elderly Americans
who were told that only LaRouche and his organization stood between the United States and a triumphant oligarchy. It was this last tactic that ultimately brought about the downfall of LaRouche
and his organization. In order to support their
leader’s political career and increasingly lavish
lifestyle, operatives began to engage in credit card
fraud, running up huge bills on the cards of elderly
citizens who had donated money.
In 1986, federal agents raided LaRouche’s estate
and headquarters in Virginia. Despite being on trial
for mail fraud and other crimes in 1988, LaRouche
also managed to run for president once again, as he
would do from prison in 1992. Ailing, LaRouche was
released from the Federal Medical Center in 1993.
While his organization remains a shadow of its former self, LaRouche has continued his political
career, running for the presidency in 1996 and 2000.
Jim Ciment
See also: Executive Intelligence Review.
References
George, John, and Laird Wilcox. 1996. American
Extremists: Militias, Supremacists, Klansmen,
Communists, and Others. Amherst, NY:
Prometheus Books.
King, Dennis. 1989. Lyndon LaRouche and the New
American Fascism. New York: Doubleday.
LaRouche, Lyndon H., Jr. 1987. The Power of
Reason: 1988, an Autobiography. New York: New
Franklin.

Leisler’s Rebellion
In November 1688, Protestant monarchs William
and Mary of Orange led a small army across the

Leisler’s Rebellion

English Channel at the behest of Parliament to
depose James II, the Stuart king whose newborn son
promised continued Catholic rule. Amid the confusion and turmoil once news of the revolution had
reached the colonies, militia captain Jacob Leisler
plotted and led a successful revolt against the colonial government of New York. On 31 May 1689,
Leisler and his largely Dutch and German force
captured Fort James on Manhattan Island, gaining
control over New York harbor and supplanting Stuart appointee Governor Francis Nicholson. While
condemned by some as treachery, Leisler’s Rebellion proved more complex than a mere plot to overthrow the colonial government—his coup lay at the
intersection of a number of significant tensions in
European and American politics, society, culture,
and religion.
In the late seventeenth century, New York found
itself entangled in chaos and transformation. In
1664, the former New Amsterdam fell to English
forces in the second Anglo-Dutch War (1664–1667).
King Charles II placed the province under the control of his brother James, duke of York and heir to
the throne. As proprietor with complete authority
over the province (Charles reserved only the right to
hear appeals), James quickly replaced Dutch officials with his English appointees and instituted a
strict disciplinary code known as “The Duke’s
Laws,” designed to inject Dutch practice with
English political custom. Despite these and other
sweeping efforts to solidify English dominance,
New York remained extremely diverse, inhabited by
Dutch, English, German, Scottish, and Huguenot
settlers spanning a large and geographically disparate area. Religious differences also split the
colony as Anglicans, Dutch Calvinists, Congregationalists, Presbyterians, Catholics, and various
other Protestant denominations vied for social influence. James II assumed the throne in 1685, replacing his brother’s inconsistent policies with his model
of absolute monarchy. In order to control the recalcitrant northern colonies, he combined them all into
the Dominion of New England, a single royal
colony.
When the news of James II’s deposition in the
Glorious Revolution and of New England’s subse-

quent overthrow of Sir Edmund Andros, the
despotic British governor, reached New York, merchant and militia captain Jacob Leisler took it upon
himself to restore Protestant rule in the colony. Capturing Fort James and New York Harbor, Leisler
proclaimed himself governor and quickly began
organizing representatives from Massachusetts, Plymouth, and Connecticut to unite with New York in
an offensive against French Canada, another
Catholic threat. Lack of cooperation between the
colonies involved soon doomed the nascent assault
and Leisler was left to deal with increasing pressure
at home. While heavily supported among the Dutch
laborers and artisans who resented the power of the
colony’s Anglo-Dutch ruling class, Leisler soon
found that he could not control the city’s powerful
merchants. He jailed numbers of powerful New
Yorkers for resisting his authority, ultimately
strengthening his opponents’ resolve to have him
removed.
When King William’s newly appointed royal governor, Colonel Henry Sloughter, sent a force of
English soldiers to secure the city in early 1691,
Leisler refused to allow them into key forts, suspecting the loyalty of their commander, Major
Robert Inglesby. The king’s forces took the city, and
at the advice of prominent community leaders,
Jacob Leisler was charged with treason for his
attack on the royal garrison at Fort James. After a
brief trial, Leisler was executed in May 1691.
Despite the death of its prominent leader,
Leisler’s Rebellion lived on in New York politics for
decades to come, even after Parliament posthumously exonerated Leisler in 1695. Jacob Leisler’s
conspiracy to restore Protestant rule to New York
fueled an ongoing political struggle between elite
and Leislerian factions that continued as New York’s
various ethnic, religious, and socioeconomic groups
clashed over the future of the colony and its relationship to the throne. Like most popular uprisings,
Leisler’s Rebellion was no mere coup, but an ideologically motivated effort to restructure power in the
developing British North American colonies.
James Carrott
See also: Shays’ Rebellion.

425

Lennon, John, Shooting of

References
Bouton, Terry. 2000. “A Road Closed: Rural
Insurgency in Post-Independence Pennsylvania.”
Journal of American History 87: 855–887.
Gross, Robert, ed. 1993. In Debt to Shays: The
Bicentennial of an Agrarian Rebellion.
Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
Lovejoy, David S. 1972. The Glorious Revolution in
America. New York: Harper and Row.
Szatmary, David. 1980. Shays’ Rebellion: The
Making of an Agrarian Insurgency. Amherst: The
University of Massachusetts Press.
Voorhees, David William. 1994. “The ‘Fervent
Zeale’ of Jacob Leisler.” William and Mary
Quarterly 51: 447–472.

Lennon, John, Shooting of
On 8 December 1980 at 10:50 P.M. John Lennon,
forty-year-old former member and creative intellect
of the Liverpool pop group the Beatles, was murdered. Lennon was returning to his apartment in
New York’s Dakota building, One West 72nd Street,
where Mark David Chapman, aged twenty-five, had
been waiting to kill him. A plethora of complex conspiracy theories surround the death of Lennon.
Recent books such as Jon Wiener’s Gimme Some
Truth: The John Lennon FBI File and others due for
publication may shed further light on the events
surrounding the death, although, as with the other
major assassinations of contemporary conspiracy
lore, this is probably overly optimistic.
The major conspiracy theory is that Chapman
was a CIA-trained assassin. According to this theory, the musician and cultural hero was seen to be a
threat to U.S. security due to his supposed radical
views. Labeled an “undesirable alien” by the Nixon
administration due to a drug conviction in England
in 1968, Lennon had since been living with the
threat of deportation, but with the birth of his son
Sean he received his green card. Lennon was one of
the most photographed and sought-after celebrities
of the twentieth century up to this point and, it has
been conjectured, he had the power to gather 2
million people in support of his own political campaigns. Such popularity, some surmised, posed a
significant threat and necessitated his death. Since
Sean’s birth in 1976 on 9 October, Lennon had been
426

living as a virtual recluse in the Dakota building,
possibly in fear for his life. In 1980 he took steps to
resume a public life again, releasing his Double
Fantasy album, a critical and commercial success.
Mark Chapman, living in Honolulu, had read of
Lennon’s return to music. On 23 October Chapman
resigned from his security job, signing out for the
last time as John Lennon. Four days later he purchased a five-shot, short-barrel .38-caliber Charter
Arms Special from a man named Ono, and then on
30 October boarded a plane bound for New York.
From New York, finding it difficult to purchase bullets, Chapman flew to Atlanta, Georgia, to visit Dana
Reeves, a friend and sheriff’s deputy, collected bullets, and was back in New York by 10 November.
However, he had a change of mind at this point and
decided to go back to Honolulu. Chapman then
apparently began to hear voices in his head telling
him to kill John Lennon and by 6 December he was
back in New York.
On Monday, 8 December, Chapman wrote the
word “Lennon” after “John” at the beginning of the
Gospel of John in the hotel Bible, then left his room
at the New York Sheraton. This and similar acts have
led psychiatrists to theorize that the shooting was a
form of suicide, with Chapman having completely
identified himself with Lennon. Chapman had been
a born-again Christian, and thus it may be argued
that this was part of a Christian mission to rid the
world of evil, based on the fundamentalist Christian
belief that the world is fallen from God’s grace and
some are chosen to redeem it. Chapman then purchased the J. D. Salinger novel The Catcher in the
Rye, arrived at the Dakota building, spoke with
doorman Patrick O’Loughlin among others, read his
book, and finally got an autograph from Lennon as
he left the Dakota building. Lennon returned home
and, following Yoko Ono into the Dakota, was shot
four times in the body and once in the arm.
Chapman maintains he did not remember aiming
the gun, just pulling the trigger, calmly. Lennon tried
to escape, but the final two bullets stopped him. José
Perdomo, a doorman at the time, was in the vicinity.
Chapman removed his coat, to indicate to police he
was not hiding a gun, and once the police arrived he
stated that he had acted alone. Chapman, despite or

Lennon, John, Shooting of

perhaps because of his mental illness, does appear to
have behaved oddly, tranquilly reading his book after
the murder and peacefully giving himself up. There
are many anomalies in the events, with the premeditated and thorough nature of the assassination raising suspicions over how he carried out and financed
his airplane trips around the United States with a
gun, as well as his stays in New York. Upon initial
questioning he claimed to have had no strong feelings about John Lennon either way.
In his book Who Killed John Lennon? attorney
Fenton Bresler presents extensive research from
over a ten-year period and argues that Chapman was
programmed by the CIA or FBI. The text reveals
how the FBI had experimented in using mentally ill
people as assassins and had been engaged in the surveillance of Lennon. Lennon himself had called the
police a number of times due to threatening phone
calls concerning the abduction of his son Sean and
harming of his wife Yoko Ono. Bresler argues that
Lennon’s killer was one of a long line of trained assassins, and some of Chapman’s history appears to concur with this theory. Chapman had spent the summer
of 1975 in Beirut, Lebanon, as a youth trainer for the
YMCA, and was certainly proficient at using a
weapon, but this perhaps came from his training as a
security guard in Hawaii. Bresler explains how the
YMCA was one of a number of international organizations the CIA utilized to plant agents worldwide.
According to Lennon’s personal diaries, analyzed
with as much fiction as fact by Robert Rosen in his
book Nowhere Man: The Final Days of John Lennon,
Lennon foresaw his martyr’s death and was himself a
great believer in conspiracy theories. He was a compulsive National Enquirer reader, believed in phenomena such as UFOs, and was utterly paranoid.
Retrospectively, one might add that his paranoia was
not entirely misplaced. Rosen was friends with Fred
Seaman, a Lennon employee who stole the John
Lennon diaries and used them as the basis for his
book, The Last Days of John Lennon: A Personal
Memoir. Yoko Ono condemned this work as pure
fabrication.
Another more populist racist and sexist conspiracy
theory points to Lennon’s wife, much maligned by
the British press for supposedly instigating the break-

up of the Beatles. Once Lennon died Yoko Ono had
a number-one hit record and benefited from the
added interest in Lennon’s work and life. The U.S.
tabloid Daily News accused her of being a CIA
employee, which links to the far-fetched theory that
Lennon himself was a CIA agent whose services were
now no longer required or who was about to renege.
According to other theories Chapman was a New
World Order stooge and John Lennon himself was
part of the New World Order under Yoko’s influence.
However, these were usually concocted by aggrieved
employees looking for financial benefit after Lennon
or Ono had terminated their employment after a
break of trust, such as Seaman’s theft of Lennon’s
diaries.
Albert Goldman in his biography of Lennon
maintains John Lennon was a violent, unstable personality who beat former band member Stu Sutcliffe
so badly that he died of a blood clot in the brain.
Some have seen such attacks as part of a conspiracy
to denigrate Lennon and his legacy. Goldman insists
that Lennon had a homosexual relationship with
manager Brian Epstein and had a personal hand in
his inexplicable “suicide.” As with the conspiracy
theory that Lennon was a CIA or New World Order
agent, this theory suggests he brought his death
upon himself.
In an interview with Playboy magazine in September 1980 (one of a number of interviews Lennon gave
in this period and the first in five years), Lennon himself referred to global conspiracies. Further links to
prove a wider conspiracy have been made to another
assassination, the attempt on President Ronald Reagan’s life. Three months after Lennon was murdered
Reagan was shot and nearly killed by John Hinckley,
in New York City. Hinckley’s father was a close personal friend of George Bush, Sr., and his sons, convicted criminal Neil, Jeb, and George. For several
weeks prior to the assassination attempt, Hinckley
imitated the movements of Mark David Chapman.
Both were carrying a paperback copy of the J. D.
Salinger novel The Catcher in the Rye. (Interestingly,
given his current recluse status, according to this conspiracy theory J. D. Salinger had ties to the U.S. intelligence community, in particular the CIA, and his
book was intended to be a mind-control program427

Lewis, Meriwether

ming tool.) Conspiracy theorists maintain that Hinkley could not have known Reagan’s exact whereabouts
unless he had received inside information, from presumably the head of the CIA at the time and future
president, George Bush, Sr.
As his trial commenced on 22 June 1981, Chapman changed his plea to guilty (on the personal
advice, he claimed, of God), thus reducing his sentence from at least twenty-five years to twenty. With
the bargaining now conducted away from the media
frenzy there was an immediate cry of a cover-up
and conspiracy. His initial defense psychiatrists had
claimed he was schizophrenic, that “the little people,” the voices inside his head, had ordered him
to do it. Dr. Naomi Goldstein, the only doctor not
to have a vested interest in the case and the first to
assess Chapman, recommended he be charged with
second-degree murder. In her report she wrote he
was not insane, but had “grandiose visions of himself” (Jones, 96).
Chapman, defending himself against accusations
of being a publicity seeker, claimed to have become
one with The Catcher in the Rye. Holden Caulfield,
the central character, is on a mission to uncover
phoniness in the world. “I understood that it had
been necessary for a man to die. A phony man had
to die. But what a beautiful foundation was laid by
his death. I became that book” (Jones, 268). To allay
his guilt, it may be concluded, Chapman had to construct a conspiracy theory around the novel and
Lennon, one that many since have believed. The
continuing high-profile and money-making status of
the Beatles and Lennon legacy (witness the new
Lennon clothes rage for children) means interest in
Lennon and his shooting has not waned. After two
decades these conspiracy theories continually work
to simultaneously obfuscate and perhaps reveal the
truth concerning the death of one of the most influential songwriters of all time.
Jason Lee
See also: Bush, George; Central Intelligence Agency;
Kennedy, John F., Assassination of; The Manchurian
Candidate; Mind Control; Monroe, Marilyn.
References
Bresler, Fenton. 1989. Who Killed John Lennon?
New York: St. Martin’s Press.

428

Elliot, Anthony. 1999. The Mourning of John
Lennon. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.
Goldman, Albert. 1988. The Lives of John Lennon.
New York: William Morrow and Co., Inc.
Jones, Jack. 2001. Let Me Take You Down: Inside the
Mind of Mark David Chapman, the Man Who
Shot John Lennon. London: Virgin.
Rosen, John. 2000. Nowhere Man: The Final Days
of John Lennon. London: Fusion Press.
Seaman, Frederic. 1991. The Last Days of John
Lennon. New York: Birch Lane Press.
Wiener, Jon. 2001. Gimme Some Truth: The John
Lennon FBI Files. Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press.

Lewis, Meriwether
The great explorer furnishes perhaps the earliest
example of what became a great American tradition:
the beloved celebrity whose ignominious, untimely
death spawned conspiracy theories intended to
restore some of the hero’s dignity. Lewis’s apparent
suicide at a remote inn off the Natchez Trace in
October 1809, when he was only thirty-five years
old, ignited a slowly simmering cauldron of alternative explanations. By the conspiracy-happy 1990s,
these included assassination by agents of General
James Wilkinson, with a cover-up orchestrated by
Thomas Jefferson himself.
Background
A soldier by occupation, the Virginia-born Lewis
was Jefferson’s private secretary for a time before
achieving international fame by successfully leading
an expedition to the Pacific and back between 1803
and 1806. Firming up the U.S. claim to the justcompleted Louisiana Purchase and laying the
groundwork for later expansion into the Pacific
Northwest while also bringing back a wealth of scientific information, Lewis and his colleague William
Clark became the new nation’s first real celebrities,
probably surpassing many of the founders themselves. President Jefferson rewarded his protégé
with an appointment as governor of the Louisiana
Territory he had just explored, a post that Jefferson
regarded as the second-highest in the land.

Lewis, Meriwether

Despite his experience as Jefferson’s presidential
“staff,” Lewis was no politician, and found his postexpedition life deeply disappointing. Delaying his
move to the territorial capital for almost a year,
Lewis searched for a wife and planned to publish the
journals of the expedition, but never managed to get
either project off the ground. Once ensconced at St.
Louis, Lewis performed terribly as territorial governor, clashing with more experienced politicians like
Territorial Secretary Frederick Bates, who called his
superior “a big baby,” and getting the affairs of his
office muddled enough to have some expenditures
rejected by the War Department. In September
1809, Lewis set out on a trip to Washington to clear
his name and see his publishers.
Southern Death Trip
The trip did not go very well. Although conspiracy
theorists point out that little was said of it while
Lewis was alive, Jefferson, William Clark, and others admitted after his death that the new governor
had developed serious psychological problems,
including intense, habitual hypochondria, for which
Lewis often medicated himself; a terrible drinking
problem; and what we would call today depression.
Alcoholism was a common affliction in the frontier
military and seems to have worsened in Lewis’s case
under the stress of his political and personal failures. Only two hundred miles into the journey,
downriver from St. Louis at New Madrid, Lewis
had to be taken ashore from his boat and treated for
some real, imagined, or self-induced illness. He
made out his last will and testament and only reembarked on the voyage when earthquakes broke out
in the area, leading his fearful valet to have his master put back on the boat.
At his next port of call, Fort Pickering near present-day Memphis, Lewis arrived in a state of “mental derangement,” inebriated and suicidal. The fort
commander, Major Gilbert Russell, had Lewis
removed from his boat and detained him for two
weeks, restricting his alcohol intake to “claret and a
little white wine” and posting guards to prevent the
explorer from doing violence to himself. Lewis
recovered his senses and promised never to touch
intoxicants again. He borrowed money and horses

Meriwether Lewis. (Library of Congress)

from Russell, and set out for Washington overland,
via the Natchez Trace, on 29 September 1809.
Apparently Lewis fell off the wagon rather quickly
during his last journey. His traveling companion after
Fort Pickering, Indian agent James Neelly, found
him “deranged” again as they crossed the Chickasaw
Nation, where they had to stop and let Lewis rest for
two days. Shortly after, Neelly brought the suspicion
of generations of conspiracy theorists on himself by
going after some lost horses and sending Lewis on
alone, planning to meet 50 miles farther up the
Trace, at the home of a white family that accommodated travelers in a place called Grinder’s Stand in
present-day Lewis County, Tennessee.
Lewis appeared at the Grinder (also spelled
Griner) house on the evening of 10 October 1809,
and though the accounts of what happened there
differ in some particulars, all agree that the governor was in a highly agitated state of mind. Priscilla
Griner, the lady of the house and the only witness to
give testimony, remembered Lewis pacing back and
429

Lewis, Meriwether

forth in the room where he was lodged talking
loudly to himself “like a lawyer.” In the wee hours of
11 October, Griner heard two pistol shots but was
too frightened to investigate. Through the cracks in
the log building, however, she saw that Lewis had
blasted away part of his own skull, shot himself in
the side, and also tried to cut his own throat with a
razor, but none of it was enough to bring immediate
death. Cowering with her children, Griner heard
the explorer asking for water but ignored his pleas
out of fright and saw him crawl off moaning. There
are several variations of Lewis’s last words, but one
appropriate remark recurs: “How hard it is to die.”
Conspiracy Theories
Few questions were raised about Lewis’s death at
the time, but beginning in the 1840s, stories began
to circulate that he was murdered, especially in Tennessee. Even then, according to historian Dawson
A. Phelps, the story did not receive much public
comment for another half century, by which time
the murder interpretation had become an established tradition among the locals and the Lewis family. From the 1890s on, it began to receive occasional
endorsements from Lewis and Clark scholars.
Even this tradition was not necessarily a conspiracy theory. Those distraught by the pathfinder’s
pathetic end may have taken comfort in the idea of
murder-not-suicide, but the few concrete ideas they
circulated about who might have killed him or why
were vague and rather mundane in nature. The leading explanation was Lewis had been killed by robbers, perhaps his own servant Pernier. The evidence
for a conspiracy or even murder is thin to nonexistent, resting largely on legend, rumors generations
removed from the source, and the willing disbelief of
later admirers that the great man could have been
capable of such degrading and desperate behavior.
Some have fingered lone eyewitness Priscilla Griner
as an accomplice who lied to cover up for her supposedly absent husband Robert and unknown others. The legends tell of Robert being tried for murder but acquitted for lack of evidence.
It is certainly true that Mrs. Griner’s credibility as
a witness is less than total, but that actually undermines the conspiracy theory further. Priscilla
430

embroidered her original story for an interviewer
twenty-nine years after Lewis’s death, adding material that made the events look more suspicious. Her
later account included the claim that two men came
to the house looking for lodging and quarreled with
Lewis, along with other conspiratorial details: three
shots instead of two, meaning that Lewis’s two pistols (the kind that had to be loaded after each shot)
could not have done the job; and an apparent
exchange of clothing between Lewis and his servant
sometime in the night.
The most thoroughgoing Lewis conspiracy theory was propounded by muckraking popular historian (and Pulitzer Prize winner) David Leon Chandler in his 1994 book, The Jefferson Conspiracies.
Departing from the usual practice, Chandler
endorsed Mrs. Griner’s revised 1838 account in full,
and surmised that Lewis was murdered while trying
to escape in his servant’s clothes, possibly by or with
the help of his erstwhile companion Neelly. As the
title of the book made obvious, Chandler was eager
to be the Woodward and Bernstein of the early
American republic and trace the murder all the way
back to the White House, or at least Monticello.
Recounting the history of the Aaron Burr conspiracy and the treasonous activities of General Wilkinson (a Spanish spy and Burr crony as well as the
ranking official in the frontier army), Chandler theorized that Lewis carried some sort of evidence
against Wilkinson and was hunted down by the general’s henchmen, who then fabricated the tales of
drunkenness and suicide that became the official
interpretation.
Chandler was able to give Jefferson himself only a
small role in the titular conspiracies. His major accusation was that the just-retired president helped
forestall further investigation by accepting the suicide explanation too quickly and lending credence to
the idea that Lewis was an alcoholic. Jefferson’s
alleged motive was to avoid exposing Wilkinson,
whose integrity Jefferson had publicly certified by
maintaining him in an important military post and
by using him as the star government witness in
Aaron Burr’s recent treason trial.
Although Jefferson’s confidence in Wilkinson was
politically calculated and extremely misplaced,

Libertarianism

Chandler’s theories hold very little water. Resting
the crux of his argument on the half-hearted nature
of the investigation, he echoed the modern assassination conspiracy literature, but begged the question of what sort of investigation could possibly have
been conducted at so remote a location at such an
early date. If one accepts the far-fetched premise of
hired political assassins stalking the American
woods in 1809, to kill a national hero, then Lewis’s
best friend and fellow explorer, William Clark, also
has to be included in the conspiracy. No man knew
Lewis, got along with him better, or respected him
more, but Clark accepted the official account just as
readily as Jefferson.
The “Jefferson conspiracy” against Meriwether
Lewis is best considered as anachronistic speculation
that tells us more about late-twentieth-century popular culture than it does about Lewis or Jefferson.
Jeffrey L. Pasley
See also: Jefferson, Thomas.
References
Chandler, David Leon. 1994. The Jefferson
Conspiracies: A President’s Role in the
Assassination of Meriwether Lewis. New York:
William Morrow and Co.
Jackson, Donald. 1991. Thomas Jefferson & and the
Stony Mountains: Exploring the West from
Monticello. Norman: University of Oklahoma
Press.
Kushner, Howard I. 1981. “The Suicide of
Meriwether Lewis: A Psychoanalytic Inquiry.”
William and Mary Quarterly 3d ser., 38: 464–481.
Phelps, Dawson A. 1956. “The Tragic Death of
Meriwether Lewis.” William and Mary Quarterly
3d ser., 13: 305–318.
Ronda, James P. 1984. Lewis and Clark among the
Indians. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Thomas Jefferson Papers, Library of Congress.

Libertarianism
Libertarianism is a political theory that holds that
the government is almost a conspiratorial force, trying to enslave the people through its coercive
power. Libertarians believe in individual freedom
and individual choice. They reject the use of force
or fraud to compel others, except in response to

force or fraud. Libertarians want to take the government out of private decisions by reducing the
size of the government to the most essential function of providing for a peaceful environment in
which all persons can prosper. As a utopian ideal,
libertarianism is based on the notion that society
exists at its most free when people work together
voluntarily without government intervention.
The basic principles of modern libertarianism are
attributed to the writings of Ayn Rand, especially
her novel Atlas Shrugged (1957). In this work, Rand
describes a U.S. society weakened by many years of
welfare. Contemporay U.S. society has made individualism and the work ethic into an evil. Instead of
working for a living, the characters in the novel
believe that the government owes them their livelihoods. In the novel Rand instead offers the maxim
of libertarianism: individualism or selfishness is
good. The economist Murray Rothbard has built
upon Rand to develop a more theoretical outline.
He argues that government is inherently aggressive
and exploitative. Instead of government, society
should rely on the free market as the most efficient
method of distributing resources.
Libertarianism became the basis for a political
party that emerged in the United States in the early
1970s. The Libertarian Party ran philosophy professor John Hospers as its presidential candidate in
1972. While the party reached the ballot in only two
states, Hospers did receive one electoral vote. Roger
MacBride, the Virginia elector who cast his vote for
Hospers in 1972, was the party’s nominee in 1976,
receiving over 200,000 votes in the November election. The party, and the libertarian movement in the
United States, grew dramatically in the late 1970s,
due primarily to the financial contributions of the
Koch brothers, Charles and David, owners of Koch
Industries. With their assistance, libertarians were
able to establish a number of publications and an
active think tank, the Cato Institute. In the election
of 1980, David Koch was the Libertarian Party’s
vice-presidential nominee, primarily to take advantage of a loophole in federal campaign finance law
allowing a candidate to spend unlimited campaign
funds. Because of the financial assistance provided
by the Kochs, the party’s nominees appeared on the
431

Liberty Lobby

ballot in all fifty states. The result of their influence
in the movement was a battle over strategy, however.
The party was split between a group of opportunists
represented by the Kochs and the “missionaries,”
following Murray Rothbard. Rothbard referred to
the Koch brothers’ influence as the “Kochtopus.”
The Libertarian Party ticket received 900,000 votes
in 1980, a disappointment considering the millions
of dollars spent by David Koch. In 1983, the Koch
supporters, also known as the “Cato group,” left the
party after their candidate was not nominated by the
party convention. Without the Kochs’ financial support, the party did not receive as much attention for
the rest of the century.
Libertarianism, and the Libertarian Party, have
had a difficult time finding acceptance in the United
States, in part because the philosophy does not fit
neatly on the liberal-conservative continuum with
which most Americans are familiar. Libertarians
emphasize free markets, making them similar to
many conservatives. It is the libertarians’ belief that
people should be free to choose their social activities,
including, for example, the use of drugs, that puts the
philosophy at odds with more cultural conservatives.
In short, libertarians believe that national defense
and law enforcement are the only areas in which governments should be involved. They oppose the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) because
it establishes an entangling alliance that might work
to bring the United States into unnecessary conflict.
The United Nations is also opposed because it
undermines national sovereignty by placing power in
the hands of international bureaucrats. Libertarians
oppose restrictions on trade and immigration, believing that the free market more efficiently regulates
these areas.
Libertarianism has enjoyed some limited success.
Many of its basic principles were voiced by the
administration of President Ronald Reagan in the
1980s. Government services were privatized in the
United States and in Europe, where a number of
national airlines and railroads were sold by the government. By the beginning of the twenty-first century, there were hundreds of thousands of libertarians around the world. Many participate as
pro-freedom activists in traditional parties while
432

others create their own political parties. All believe
that government is the problem, not the solution.
John David Rausch, Jr.
See also: Koch Brothers.
References
Bergland, David. 1997. Libertarianism in One
Lesson. 7th ed. Costa Mesa, CA: Orpheus.
Rand, Ayn. 1957. Atlas Shrugged. New York:
Random House.
Rothbard, Murray N. 1973. For a New Liberty: The
Libertarian Manifesto. New York: Macmillan.
Websites
Insitute for Humane Studies site on libertarianism:
http://www.libertarian.org.
Advocates for Self-Government: http://www.
self-gov.org/libertarianism.html.
Libertarian Party: http://www.lp.org.

Liberty Lobby
Established in 1957 by Willis Carto, Liberty Lobby
was initially described as a pressure group for patriotism. It published a detailed record of how members of Congress voted on key issues, testified before
congressional committees, and, in the 1960s, supported the presidential candidacy first of the conservative Republican Barry Goldwater, then the segregationist former governor of Alabama, George
Wallace. In 1971, however, the country’s leading conservative magazine, National Review, published an
article accusing Carto of creating the Lobby as a front
behind which he concealed his real views. As early as
the mid-1950s, it observed, he had been involved in
a scheme to repatriate black Americans to Africa,
while in 1960 he had visited the U.S. neo-Nazi, Francis Parker Yockey, who was being held in the San
Francisco County Jail for passport offenses. Following Yockey’s suicide, Carto had published and written
the introduction to a new edition of a book Yockey
had written in the late 1940s, Imperium, in which he
had praised “the German revolution of 1933.”
Carto’s organization nonetheless continued to
attract support and in 1975 was in a position to
launch a weekly tabloid, the National Spotlight, later
the Spotlight. The popularity of publications such as
the National Enquirer, it declared in its first edition,
was because of the American people’s thirst for infor-

Liddy, G. Gordon

mation suppressed by the establishment media, and
in the years that followed the paper’s antipathy to
what it described as a Zionist plot mingled with and
was sometimes masked by its propensity to publish a
veritable smorgasbord of sensational allegations.
Amidst claims of plans for UN occupation and
“internationalist” weather manipulation, a central
theme was the machinations of such bodies as the
Trilateral Commission and the Bilderberg Group.
In the mid-1970s the Lobby published a collection
of documents that sought to demonstrate that the
Bilderbergers’ annual gathering of leading figures
in politics, business, and the media served as a front
for the Rockefellers’ and Rothschilds’ drive for a
one-world government. This pamphlet, it declared,
presented irrefutable proof of the truth of conspiracy theory.
While the Spotlight and a weekly radio program,
Radio Free America, were central to the Lobby’s
activities, it also sold recommended publications
through its Liberty Library, ranging from the earlytwentieth-century British far-rightist Nesta Webster’s
conspiratorial interpretation of the French Revolution to a pamphlet on the Oklahoma bombing, Timothy McVeigh: Mastermind or Patsy? Amidst the different publications promoted by the Lobby, one of
the most important was Carto’s own study, Profiles in
Populism, in which he defined the organization’s
beliefs. Where conservatives, he argued, defended
free trade and involved the nation in foreign entanglements, populists recognized the need to protect
the national economy and to pursue a noninterventionist foreign policy.
As National Review had complained, Carto’s
organization blended well with the conservative
milieu, and it was not always easy to locate it with
certainty. It had drawn attention to Carto’s private
correspondence, in which he had lamented the
Nazis’ defeat by “the International Jews.” In the
early 1990s, the Spotlight was to publish a defense of
the Waffen SS, which, it declared, had fought for
Europe and the defeat of communism. The most
important indication of the underlying logic of
Carto’s argument, however, was his central role in
the creation in the late 1970s of the leading Holocaust revisionist organization, the Institute for His-

torical Review. In 1993, however, a bitter argument
over a bequest left by the heir to the Edison fortune
led to Carto being locked out of the Institute’s offices
and a series of court cases that ultimately, in 2001,
resulted in the closing down of both Liberty Lobby
and the Spotlight. While both sides in the dispute
continued to adhere to Holocaust revisionism, Carto
declared that his erstwhile colleagues were working
with the Israeli Mossad, the CIA, and the Church of
Scientology in order to destroy his work.
Martin Durham
See also: Bilderbergers; Spotlight; Trilateral
Commission.
References
Berlet, Chip, and Mathew N. Lyons. 2000. RightWing Populism in America. New York: Guilford
Press.
Liberty Lobby. Liberty Lobby 1975 Progress Report.
n.d. Washington, DC: Liberty Lobby.
———. [1975] 1989. Spotlight on the Bilderbergers.
Washington, DC: Liberty Lobby.
Mintz, Frank P. 1985. The Liberty Lobby and the
American Right. Race, Conspiracy, and Culture.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
National Spotlight,17 September 1975.
Spotlight, 26 June 1989; 13 September 1993; 27
October 1997.
Zeskind, Lenny. 2000. “Liberty Lobby Closes Its
Doors, Spotlight Ceases Publication.” Searchlight,
September.
Websites
Spotlight: http://www.spotlight.org.
Willis Carto Information Site: http://homepage.mac.
com/lsf.

Liddy, G. Gordon
Of all the characters to be thrown up by Watergate,
G. Gordon Liddy was one of the most colorful. Unlike the bookish lawyers, such as John Dean, caught
up in the scandal, Liddy portrayed himself as a man
of action and steel, refusing to answer questions and
remaining loyal to President Nixon. A proud conservative, Liddy never apologized for or seemed
ashamed by what he had done, which included planning the botched Watergate break-in itself. He was
imprisoned for his part in the affair, but after his
release he used his righteous hard-man persona and
433

Liddy, G. Gordon

powerful articulacy to become a successful public
speaker and nationally syndicated radio talk-show
host.
Liddy became involved in Watergate through his
role in the “Plumbers,” a small group within the
White House charged with stopping damaging leaks
following the release of the Pentagon Papers. Liddy
was already working in the White House and he was
chosen for the Plumbers because of his experience in
law enforcement; he had spent five years in the FBI
before becoming an assistant district attorney in
upstate New York. He came to the attention of
national Republican leaders in 1968 when he narrowly lost a New York congressional primary race
against Hamilton Fish, Jr., a scion of a famous Republican family. After the defeat he took an active role in
the Nixon campaign, for which he was rewarded with
a job in the Treasury Department. However, he
quickly fell out with his boss there and moved to the
White House to work on “narcotics, bombings, and
guns” under John Mitchell, the attorney general.
At the Plumbers, Liddy worked closely with E.
Howard Hunt in organizing the September 1971
break-in at the office of Daniel Ellsberg’s psychiatrist.
However, their men botched the job, failing to find
Ellsberg’s file and ransacking the office. Undeterred,
Liddy and Hunt pushed for a second break-in at the
psychiatrist’s home, but John Ehrlichman, who had
been appalled by the damage done in the first operation, blocked it. The Plumbers continued to push
other plans for attacking Nixon’s enemy, including
drugging Ellsberg with LSD and firebombing the
Brookings Institution, until Liddy moved to the Campaign to Re-elect the President (CRP) in December
1971. There he worked as the general counsel while
planning “dirty tricks” for the forthcoming election.
Throughout his career, Liddy unsettled many people who dealt with him because of his macho posturing, rampant conservatism, and gun advocacy. He
also committed bizarre acts to show his strength and
will, including holding his arm over a candle until it
turned black. At the CRP he terrified his immediate
superior, Jeb Magruder, which afforded him a free
hand in planning GEMSTONE, a program of
espionage and sabotage for the 1972 presidential
election. Liddy presented his plan to Mitchell,
434

Magruder, and the president’s counsel, John Dean,
in the attorney general’s office on 27 January 1972. It
was a James Bond fantasy of wiretaps, prostitutes,
and spy planes, and while Mitchell later told the Senate Watergate Committee that he “should have
thrown him [Liddy] out of the window,” he merely
turned the proposal down politely. Liddy believed
that it was merely a question of costs so he presented
a second, cheaper plan on 4 February. However, this
was also rejected and as no one (especially not
Magruder) was prepared to tell Liddy that the whole
thing was too much, he cut back even further. Eventually a third plan, which consisted of a few wiretaps,
prostitutes, and infiltrating opposition campaigns was
finally approved. As a first step, Liddy’s men installed
bugs in the Democrats’ offices in the Watergate
building on 27 May. They failed to work properly,
however, and when the team reentered the offices on
16 June to repair the bugs and photograph documents, they were arrested by the Washington police.
Liddy watched the arrests from a hotel room
opposite the Watergate building and it soon became
clear that he had made a number of mistakes. The
most important was using James McCord, the CRP’s
security consultant, as one of the burglars. McCord
was quickly linked back to the campaign, which indirectly implicated the White House in the affair. The
day after the burglary Liddy started shredding
papers, and even money, at the CRP and called
Magruder in California, who started the “damage
control” along with Mitchell, which snowballed into
the Watergate cover-up. The same day, Liddy was
also sent to meet the new attorney general, Richard
Kleindienst, and to ask him to get McCord released
from jail. Kleindienst refused.
After that, Liddy played little active role in the
cover-up, as the White House kept him at arm’s
length even before he was implicated. He told John
Dean all that had happened on the Monday after the
burglary (and even offered to be shot) but from then
on he laid low. The FBI linked him to the crime in
June through his White House phone number,
which was in pocket books carried by the burglars.
Liddy was questioned by agents but he refused to
answer and was accordingly fired by the CRP. On 15
September he was indicted along with the burglars

Lincoln, Abraham, Assassination of

and Hunt on criminal bugging charges. He refused
to testify at his trial and his obstinate manner caused
the judge, John Sirica, to sentence him to twenty
years. Liddy later received a further eighteen
months for contempt when he refused to testify
before the Watergate grand jury after being granted
immunity.
Liddy eventually spent fifty-two months in prison
and after his release in 1977, he started a new
career in the media. He wrote novels and also his
autobiography, Will, giving his side of Watergate,
but only after the statute of limitations had run out.
The book was made into a TV movie, and Liddy also
began a lucrative speaking career including debates
with the LSD guru, Timothy Leary. (As an assistant
district attorney, Liddy had twice arrested Leary.)
In 1990, he found another forum for his conservative politics and gun advocacy, a radio talk-show on
WJFK in Washington, D.C., which soon achieved
national syndication. He has also branched out into
acting, playing “baddies” in TV shows like Miami
Vice, McGyver, and Perry Mason.
Neil Denslow
See also: Nixon, Richard; Pentagon Papers;
Watergate.
References
Emery, Fred. 1994. Watergate: The Corruption and
Fall of Richard Nixon. London: Pimlico.
Liddy, G. Gordon. 1997. Will: The Autobiography of
G. Gordon Liddy. Rev. ed. New York: St. Martin’s
Press.
Website
G. Gordon Liddy: http://www.ggordonliddyshow.
com.

Lincoln, Abraham, Assassination of
The assassination of Abraham Lincoln on Good
Friday (14 April), 1865, by actor John Wilkes Booth
unleashed a flood of rumors regarding larger conspiracies afoot. Hardly had the president breathed
his last early Saturday morning, when officials and
public alike began accusing Confederate leaders
and secret organizations in the North of masterminding the murder. A New York Times editorial on
26 April vowed that when the time came for reve-

lations, “[i]t will be seen that all the talk of ‘Knights
of the Golden Circle,’ ‘Sons of Liberty,’ ‘American
Knights,’ &c., was not without foundation.” President Andrew Johnson’s proclamation of 2 May 1865
ordering the arrest of Jefferson Davis and several
others explicitly accused the Confederate leadership of complicity in Lincoln’s death. While the
very tangible political and emotional stresses that
gave rise to these accusations abated in the years
following the murder, the effort to tie the deed to a
larger, hidden plan did not. Theories implicating a
surprising range of persons and causes—from the
Confederacy, to Andrew Johnson, the Catholic
Church, Wall Street financiers, and even Lincoln’s
stalwart secretary of war, Edwin Stanton—surfaced
over the next century. Some remain in vogue to this
day. If the Kennedy assassination has been the
greatest single source for conspiratorial expression
in recent U.S. culture, Lincoln’s certainly deserves
credit as the longest running. And like their contemporary cousins, conspiracy theories linked to
the first presidential assassination were forged in
the context of surrounding political, social, and cultural forces.
The Basis in Events
In the days following the shooting, there were legitimate reasons for fearing a larger plot. Booth accomplice Lewis Powell’s simultaneous knife-attack on
Secretary of State William Seward made the possibility of an organized assault on the Union leadership
very real. It was reported that officers sent to inform
Stanton of the shooting accosted a man “muffled in a
cloak” on the secretary’s doorstep. Booth’s calling
card left for Vice-President Andrew Johnson at the
latter’s hotel raised hackles further. And the discovery of a letter in the actor’s trunk at the National
Hotel, in which Booth’s correspondent advised a halt
in plans until “Richmond could be heard from,”
(U.S. Government, 46:3, 781) seemed to confirm the
authorities’ worst suspicions. The capture of Powell
at Mary Surratt’s boarding house on 17 April, and the
arrest within a few days of most of Booth’s other
accomplices, provided firm evidence that the attacks
had sprung from an organized center. In the minds
of many, including Edwin Stanton and the officers
435

Lincoln, Abraham, Assassination of

charged with bringing the conspirators to trial, there
was little doubt this center originated with the Confederacy.
The larger political and military situation preceding Lincoln’s death contributed to the climate of conspiracy. On 9 April, a mere five days before the assassination, the rebel Army of Northern Virginia under
Robert E. Lee surrendered to Ulysses S. Grant at
Appomattox Court House. This signaled the effective end of the Civil War and the North erupted in
celebration. But in reality Lee’s surrender marked
the beginning, not the end, of the cessation of hostilities between North and South. Confederate forces
remained in the field. In Virginia, some units, including Mosby’s Rangers, refused to surrender. In midApril, there were reports that forces under his command were launching raids into Maryland from
across the Potomac. In addition to active military
forces, eastern Maryland and northern Virginia were
full of disbanded soldiers and displaced civilians.
Refugees crowded Richmond and Petersburg, seeking food and shelter from federal commissaries.
Some ex-rebels formed marauding bands, adding to
the uncertain security in the countryside. Others
headed toward Washington and Baltimore, believing
the federal government would provide free transportation to their homes in the South (U.S. Government, 46:3, 868–869). Thus, in addition to sustaining
the loss of its chief of state, the area in and around
Washington experienced a period of turmoil as hostilities gradually ended.
In the North the euphoria following Lee’s surrender quickly turned to bewilderment and a desire for
vengeance as news of Lincoln’s death made its way
across the country. It did not ease matters that the
surrender and murder coincided with two of the
most important dates, Palm Sunday and Good Friday respectively, on the Christian calendar. The religious symbolism attached to the tragedy culminated
as the funeral cortege bearing Lincoln’s embalmed
body wound its way through northern cities on its
1,600-mile journey back to the president’s hometown of Springfield, Illinois. More important, however, to understanding the basis for the initial conspiracy theories, is recognizing that at the time of his
death Abraham Lincoln was a controversial figure in
436

the North. Many held him in high esteem, but others reviled him for the war’s slaughter and for his
actions in favor of black Americans. Northern political dissent was centered in the Democratic Party,
and in particular among anti-war Democrats,
termed “Copperheads.” It ran especially strong in
the larger cities outside New England and in the old
Northwest, ironically, the very region Lincoln hailed
from. In the aftermath of 14 April, newspapers
reported individuals and communities celebrating
his death by burning effigies and firing explosives.
Irate mobs tarred and feathered some of these celebrants and others were rescued by policemen. In
Westminster, Maryland, a Democratic newspaper
editor was murdered for publishing anti-Lincoln
comments following the assassination.
The presence of this political dissent in the North
helped feed popular rumors concerning the operations of so-called dark lantern societies, secret
organizations including the previously mentioned
Knights of the Golden Circle, devoted to political
and military treason. Historians generally agree the
real extent of the groups’ activities was greatly exaggerated at the time. The exaggerated accounts were
often produced by Republican newspaper editors
seeking to discredit the Democrats before election
time. Regardless of the reality, the evidence indicates that a good percentage of the northern public
paid attention to the rumors implicating the groups
in Lincoln’s death. In the months that followed popular literary works, including Dion Haco’s pseudonymous John Wilkes Booth, the Assassinator of Abraham Lincoln, and Ned Buntline’s pseudonymous
John Wilkes Booth, provided fictionalized accounts
of a conspiracy involving secret northern societies.
Culture and Politics
Despite the circumstantial evidence and testimony
given by government witnesses, investigating
authorities never established a hard link between
Booth and the Confederate government, or between Booth and northern secret societies. Following the conviction of eight of his accomplices by a
military tribunal in June 1865, belief in a grand
conspiracy involving the rebel chieftains slowly
faded from view. The execution of Mary Surratt

Lincoln, Abraham, Assassination of

(along with George Atzerodt, Davey Herold, and
Lewis Powell) on 7 July 1865 dampened the public’s enthusiasm for extreme justice. Much of the
testimony proving the involvement of Confederate
leaders unraveled when it was revealed that the
government’s chief witness, an adventurer named
Charles Dunham, had fabricated most of it. Jefferson Davis was released from prison in May 1867
without ever being indicted. The disclosure of
Booth’s “missing” diary by former Secret Service
chief Lafayette C. Baker during testimony before
the Senate Judiciary Committee in early 1867 further discredited the government’s case. The diary
had been taken from Booth’s body after he was shot
on the Virginia farmstead on the morning of 26
April 1865. Turned over to the War Department, it
was never introduced in evidence at the conspirators’ trial. Its pages confirmed the testimony of
most of the accomplices: the plan had been to kidnap Lincoln and escort him safely to Confederate
lines. Booth acted largely on his own initiative in
deciding to assassinate the president.
However, the diary did help launch the next
round of conspiracy-making. It is at this point that
historian William Hanchett’s thesis on the relationship between national politics and Lincoln assassination theories provides a useful perspective for
understanding their subsequent development.
Baker not only revealed the diary’s existence, but
when shown the book following its subpoena from
the War Department, he claimed on the witness
stand that pages had been removed since it had
been turned over to Stanton in April 1865. Despite
the testimony of federal officials that the pages had
been torn out by Booth and used as notes, suspicions were immediately raised over what might
have been written on the “missing” pages. Leading
the charge was former political general and
recently elected Republican congressman Benjamin Butler. In March 1867, Butler accused the
government prosecutors of purposefully withholding the diary during the conspirators’ trial, resulting, among other things, in the judicial murder of
Mary Surratt. Drawing from Baker’s allegation of
missing pages, and Booth’s own statement in the
diary that he proposed to return to Washington

John Wilkes Booth shoots President Abraham Lincoln in
the head at Ford’s Theatre on 14 April 1865. The beloved
president died of his wound the next day. (Library of
Congress)

“and clear myself from this great crime,” Butler
went on to insinuate the involvement of high government officials in the conspiracy to murder Lincoln wanting to know who had tampered with the
diary after the government had got hold of it. In
July, he introduced a resolution in the House of
Representatives establishing a five-member committee to investigate the assassination. The resolution’s preamble reaffirmed that the crime had
been abetted by many people holding high positions of power. Butler’s target was President
Andrew Johnson and his aim was shared by other
Radical Republicans who, as Hanchett notes, were
intent on finding evidence that could be used to
impeach the president. Johnson, so the reasoning
went, was the only person to gain materially from
Lincoln’s death. But the evidence against him was
437

Lincoln, Abraham, Assassination of

unsubstantiated and relied almost entirely on the
innuendoes of Baker and others.
The real motivations for the charges against the
president lay in the bitter conflict then raging
between Johnson and the Radical-controlled Congress over Reconstruction. By early 1867 the executive and legislative branches of the government were
at loggerheads, with Johnson vetoing most of the
congressional legislation bearing on Reconstruction
policy, and Congress overriding his vetoes to pass the
Civil Rights Act of 1866, the Fourteenth Amendment, the extension of the Freedmen’s Bureau Act,
and more. In February 1867, at the same time the
Senate Judiciary Committee heard testimony from
Baker, Congress passed the Military Reconstruction
Act, which divided the South into five military districts and established more stringent conditions,
including black suffrage, for readmitting the southern states. Thus, the theory implicating Johnson
sprang from tangible political conflicts, and Butler’s
accusations may be read as a form of political theater
overlaying more serious issues.
As it turned out, the theory outlived its immediate
political usefulness and lived on into the next century
when most of the details explaining Johnson’s
involvement would be worked out. At the time, however, it represented a significant stage in the development of Lincoln theories for alleging the malefactor was inside the government, and that the
government was involved in a cover-up. It also displayed the unique characteristic of all early theories:
they were encouraged and oftentimes fabricated
from inside the government, by officials and political
actors like Butler and Baker. It also inspired a number of popular literary works over the next several
decades, the most famous probably being Tennessee
attorney Finis L. Bates’s Escape and Suicide of John
Wilkes Booth (1907) in which he combined Johnson’s involvement with the legend of Booth’s escape.
In the 1880s, a fourth theory emerged, arguing that
the conspiracy originated with the Catholic Church.
Charles Chiniquy’s Fifty Years in the Church of Rome
(1886) was the first of several works alleging a
Catholic plot. A French-Canadian priest who had
emigrated to Illinois, Chiniquy met Lincoln when the
latter defended him in a civil trial against his Catholic
438

superiors. The case was settled before going to a jury,
but the priest believed Lincoln had earned the bitter
enmity of the Catholic Church and its Jesuit henchmen in defending him. Worse, Lincoln stood for
everything the Catholic Church hated, so Chiniquy
argued. The clinching evidence in his presentation
was statements reportedly made before witnesses by
priests at a monastery in St. Joseph, Minnesota, on
the day of the assassination, but hours before events
unfolded in Washington. A Protestant clergyman
swore an affidavit stating that he had been told the
priests said Lincoln and Seward were dead before the
fact. How did they gain this foreknowledge? Chiniquy
asserted it came through the dissemination of the plot
through the church’s network: “[t]hey are members of
the same body, the branches of the same tree.”
For Chiniquy and several others, the Catholic
Church not only plotted Lincoln’s murder, it also
planned to destroy America’s free institutions in its
quest for world domination. These accusations were
frequently voiced by native-born Protestants in the
nineteenth century and were part of the rise in
nativist sentiment in the 1890s. Historian John
Higham argues this rise reflected a larger national
crisis—the class cleavages then investing U.S. society. The anti-Catholic theories may be read as
belonging to this larger phenomenon. But they also
appear to have served more mundane political purposes. Burke McCarty’s The Suppressed Truth about
the Assassination of Abraham Lincoln appeared in
1922, in the midst of the debate over Prohibition and
six years before Catholic governor Al Smith’s unsuccessful bid for the presidency. Reprints of an earlier
anti-Catholic work appeared in 1960, in time for
John F. Kennedy’s successful candidacy to become
the nation’s first (and only) Catholic president.
Commemoration and Revisionism
According to historian Merrill Peterson, the 1920s
and 1930s witnessed the peak period of Abraham
Lincoln’s commemoration in U.S. culture. Historical studies and popular texts, including Carl Sandburg’s massive two-part biography, were supplemented by works in stone. The dedication of the
Lincoln Memorial in 1922 and the completion of
Lincoln’s head in the Mount Rushmore group in

Lincoln, Abraham, Assassination of

1937 marked the high points of this monumental
commemoration. Lincoln studies also reached an
important watershed with James G. Randall’s 1934
essay “Has the Lincoln Theme Been Exhausted?”
in which he decried the lack of professional historical studies of the sixteenth president (Peterson,
256). Into this mix of popular commemoration and
historical dedication appeared the most radical conspiracy theory ever associated with the assassination. Austrian-born Otto Eisenschiml’s Why Was
Lincoln Murdered? (1937) presented a mass of circumstantial evidence that implied Lincoln’s own
secretary of war, Edwin Stanton, was the mastermind behind the murder. The Eisenschiml Thesis,
as it is termed, quickly overshadowed all previous
theories by virtue of its outlandish assault on Stanton’s historical reputation, and the implication that
the perpetrator of America’s greatest tragedy was
Lincoln’s own trusted advisor.
Eisenschiml based his argument on a series of
anomalous events that occurred just before, during,
and after the assassination. These included General
Grant’s sudden decision not to accept the Lincolns’
invitation to the theater, Stanton’s alleged refusal to
detail the husky Major Eckert to escort the president at his request, the assignment of a derelict
patrolman as the president’s bodyguard, the breakdown in the telegraph system for two hours immediately following the shooting, and more. Behind
these apparently isolated instances, Eisenchiml
argued, there lay a broad plot on the part of the
Radical Republicans under Stanton to seize control
of the government and punish the South. The Radicals had deliberately prolonged the war in order to
ensure the abolition of slavery and the South’s
destruction. At the war’s conclusion, they were dismayed at Lincoln’s proposal to “let them up easy.”
The Radicals decided to remove Lincoln and the
leading moderate of his cabinet, William Seward.
With these two men out of the way, so the argument
went, the way would be clear for Stanton to dominate the government and for the Radicals to exact
vengeance on the South. Booth’s death, and the
quick trial by military tribunal of his accomplices
(who were then either executed or imprisoned in
the Dry Tortugas), were parts of the cover-up.

This theory and its political rationale were
extreme expressions of the then-current revisionist
interpretation of Civil War history. Revisionism held
that the war could have been avoided, but that it was
forced on the United States by the extremism of
northern abolitionists. The war’s principal cause had
not been slavery but the constitutional issue of
states’ rights. Lincoln had been a moderate, both on
matters of race and in his plans to restore the South.
The Radicals bore responsibility for turning Reconstruction into a nightmare by insisting on black suffrage and imposing harsh conditions on the former
rebel states. An earlier extreme expression of these
views was Thomas Dixon, Jr.’s The Clansman (1905),
which served as the basis for D. W. Griffith’s silent
film Birth of a Nation (1915). The revisionist interpretation gained mainstream acceptance in U.S.
society during the first decades of the twentieth century and is seen as the intellectual corollary to the
growing racial intolerance of white society during
the same period. The politics in Eisenschiml’s work
does not appear to have raised much of a storm at
the time. While several scholars noted the political
implications in their reviews, the popular press
praised the book for its “refreshing directness” and
“just and impartial” treatment.
Modern Refrains
In the post–World War II era Lincoln conspiracy
theories have, for the most part, given way to other
topics. Their periodic resurgence indicates, however,
that Lincoln’s death still holds power in U.S. culture.
With one notable exception, the recent accounts
borrow from previous material. Theodore Roscoe’s
Web of Conspiracy (1959) restated the Eisenschiml
Thesis, adding little that was new. Whether his use of
the thesis carries the same revisionist intentions is
another matter. Emmett McLoughlin’s An Inquiry
into the Assassination of Abraham Lincoln (1963)
again raised the specter of a Catholic plot. Like his
predecessor Joseph Chiniquy, McLoughlin was a
former priest. Kennedy’s assassination in November
1963 has probably laid to rest theories of this type.
The most prolonged eruption of assassination theorizing occurred in the mid-1970s with the production of a movie and companion book titled simply
439

Lincoln, Abraham, Assassination of

The Lincoln Conspiracy (1977). This intentionally
commercial production again resuscitated the Eisenschiml Thesis and for good measure threw in the legend of Booth’s escape, northern speculators, Confederate leaders, and Andrew Johnson. Authors David
Balsiger and Charles Sellier’s most original contribution to conspiracy literature was their alleged use of
scientific testing, including special-light photography
and chemical analysis, of physical evidence related to
the assassination. Once again the famous diary took
center stage when unwary officials at the Ford’s Theater museum allowed the movie producers to examine the book. Even more shocking was their claim to
have obtained transcripts of the diary’s “missing”
pages through a collector of Americana who found
them among papers in the possession of Stanton’s
heirs. The missing pages proved, they claimed, the
secretary’s involvement, and listed “the names of 70
prominent people directly and indirectly involved in
Booth’s plan to kidnap Lincoln” (Balsiger and Sellier,
11).
Contrary to past episodes, assassination experts
and professional historians quickly mobilized to
attack the work’s credibility. The level of professional concern can be gauged by documents viewable (as of December 2001) at the FBI Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA) online reading room. Correspondence between historians and government
officials, and between federal agencies, reveals the
preoccupation in the post-Watergate era with protecting mainstream historical accounts against malicious fabrications. Concern reached the level of
Vice-President Mondale’s office and the FBI was
requested by the Department of the Interior (parent
organization of the National Park Service, the curator of Ford’s Theater) to analyze the famous diary
for evidence of tampering, invisible ink, or other
“hidden” messages. After subjecting the diary to its
own special-light techniques, the FBI crime lab
returned a clean bill of health: no evidence of hidden messages was found. Assassination experts
including William C. Davis, editor of Civil War
Times, also subjected the work’s many claims to rigid
scrutiny and succeeded in debunking most of them.
Despite its failure to sustain a credible case for conspiracy, The Lincoln Conspiracy once again proved
440

the allure of theories alleging governmental malfeasance and cover-up. As several commentators noted
at the time, the movie’s release was clearly tied to
the popular distrust of government in the wake of
Vietnam and Watergate.
The most recent theory returns full circle to
accuse the Confederate leadership of organizing the
plot. In Come Retribution (1988), James Tidwell and
coauthors James Hall and David Gaddy assert Booth
was an agent of the Confederate clandestine services. By far the best researched and historically
detailed of the accounts written to date, it still lacks
direct evidence linking Booth to an organized southern effort. Like their predecessors, the authors rely
upon a wealth of circumstantial evidence and inferential reasoning to make their case. They theorize
that the Confederate plan to capture Lincoln followed the failed Dahlgren raid in February 1864.
Special orders found on the body of Colonel Ulric
Dahlgren indicated that in addition to freeing Union
prisoners held in Libby Prison, he intended to set
fire to the city and kill Davis and his cabinet. The
South reacted with outrage, while northern officials
denied any knowledge of the second mission. Convinced of Lincoln’s intent to wage barbaric warfare,
the Confederates set in motion their own plans for
retribution. Over the next twelve months rebel intelligence services and covert operatives began to
organize and recruited Booth as an “action agent” in
the Union capital. Booth, in turn, began to assemble
his “action team.” In February 1865, the Confederate cipher key was changed to the phrase “Come
Retribution,” indicating, according to the authors,
“that the Confederate government had made a bitter decision to repay some of the misery that had
been inflicted on the South.”
The authors maintain that the Confederacy had
plenty of will, and supplies, left to fight on in early
1865. Their master plan called for an orderly pullout
from Richmond in mid-April, the staging of supplies
along the route of evacuation, and the link-up of
Lee’s Army with Johnston’s in North Carolina. Once
joined, the two forces would defeat Sherman’s army
before turning on Grant. Furthermore, the Confederacy underwent a political redefining in early 1865
and “was willing to accept a revolution in social, eco-

Lindbergh Baby Kidnapping

nomic, and political organizations—the abolition of
slavery—as the price of independence so long as the
South could preside over the transition from slavery” (Tidwell et al., 375). Lincoln’s capture was part
of this political remake: as a captive he would provide the South with additional leverage in negotiating peace terms. Timing was crucial. The capture
had to be effected prior to the pullout, while Lee’s
forces (including elements of Mosby’s command)
were still operating in northern Virginia and could
provide cover for the fleeing operatives and their
charge. Unfortunately Booth failed to execute the
plan, despite two attempts to kidnap the president in
March, and the window of opportunity closed.
Grant struck the Petersburg defenses sooner than
expected, and his breakthrough in early April made
further attempts at capture unfeasible. A second
plan, to mine the White House and blow up Lincoln
and his cabinet, also failed when the Confederate
demolitions expert sent to work with Booth was captured by Union cavalry on 18 March. With this failure, and the fall of Richmond several weeks later,
Booth assembled the remaining elements of his
“action team” and carried out the final option.
This is a tale masterfully told, and while portions
of the book provide a first-rate historical account of
the assassination, Come Retribution ultimately relies
upon a web of coincidence and suggestive readings
of primary documents to make its case. It imputes a
higher level of organizational effectiveness to the
Confederate government than most historians
would allow. Additionally, Tidwell’s background as
an intelligence officer often leads him to reject
prima facie evidence in favor of more hidden explanations. Last, as with all previous conspiracy
accounts, there are the contemporary political and
ideological influences to consider. The revelations of
the Iran-Contra hearings in 1986 may have been a
factor, and the work’s preface notes that the Lincoln
operation “is a classic example of one that was too
closely tied to critical government decisions, influenced by unexpected circumstances beyond those
responsible for it, and had an impact quite unlike
that anticipated when the operation was planned”
(Tidwell et al., xi). But the reader may also discern a
subtle, postmodern version of the “lost cause” inter-

pretation of history in which the viability of the
southern cause is ironically reasserted as the plot to
kill Lincoln unfolds.
C. Wyatt Evans
See also: Booth, John Wilkes.
References
Balsiger, David, and Charles Sellier. 1977. The
Lincoln Conspiracy. Los Angeles, CA: Schick
Sunn.
Bryan, George S. 1940. The Great American Myth.
New York: Carrick and Evans.
Davis, William C. 1977. “Caveat Emptor.” Civil War
Times, August, 32–37.
Eisenschiml, Otto. 1937. Why Was Lincoln
Murdered? London: Faber and Faber.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. John Wilkes Booth.
http://foia.fbi.gov/booth.htm.
Hanchett, William. 1983. The Lincoln Murder
Conspiracies. Urbana and Chicago: University of
Illinois Press.
Klement, Frank L. 1984. Dark Lanterns: Secret
Political Societies, Conspiracies, and Treason
Trials in the Civil War. Baton Rouge: Louisiana
State University Press.
National Archives and Record Administration. RG
153. Investigation and Trial Papers Relating to
the Assassination of Abraham Lincoln. Microfilm
ID M599.
Oldroyd, Osborne H. 1901. The Assassination of
Abraham Lincoln, Washington, DC: O.H.
Oldroyd.
Peterson, Merrill D. 1994. Lincoln in American
Memory. New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Turner, Thomas R. 1982. Beware the People
Weeping: Public Opinion and the Assassination of
Abraham Lincoln. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
University Press.
U.S. Government. 1894. War of the Rebellion:
Official Records of the Union and Confederate
Armies. Series 1, vol. 46, part 3. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office.

Lindbergh Baby Kidnapping
When twenty-month-old Charles Lindbergh, Jr., son
of the world-famous aviator, was kidnapped on 1
March 1932, the story made headlines around the
globe. More than two years later, when the authorities announced they had arrested a suspect in the
441

Lindbergh Baby Kidnapping

crime, German immigrant Bruno Richard Hauptmann, the outcry of relief was immense. Newspapers in the United States as well as Europe covered
the “Trial of the Century,” trumpeting Hauptmann’s
arrest, conviction, and execution with screaming
headlines. Yet, almost from the moment of his
arrest, questions have arisen regarding Hauptmann’s
actual degree of involvement in the case. A small but
dogged group of researchers has set forth a number
of troubling charges, including lying by witnesses,
police fabrication of evidence, and dereliction in
Hauptmann’s legal defense. Together, these journalists, attorneys, and documentary filmmakers—and a
fervid group of Hauptmann’s latter-day supporters
who continue to research the case—argue that
Hauptmann was the victim of a conspiracy. Law enforcement agencies, they assert, were influenced by
Lindbergh’s immense celebrity, the fervent antiGerman sentiment in the United States in 1934, and
the growing pressure to solve such a high-profile
case.
Some of the supporters of a conspiracy theory
(e.g., Ahlgren and Monier) even point the finger at
Lindbergh himself. They suggest that the pilot who
became the first person to fly solo across the Atlantic
in May 1927 may have originally intended simply to
play a prank on his wife by “kidnapping” the baby
(he had, once before, taken the baby and hidden it
in a closet while his wife frantically searched for
him) but he accidentally fell off a ladder, killing the
baby and requiring a “cover story” to preserve his
reputation as a national hero.
Other writers who have examined the case (e.g.,
Behn) have posited the prospect of an inside job—
pointing to a disgruntled employee or mentally
unbalanced relative of the family. And there are
those researchers who have not attempted to finger
the guilty party, but instead focus on what they see
as inexplicable lapses in police procedure and gross
negligence on the part of the courts in protecting
the rights of Hauptmann. All of the conspiracy theorists build their respective cases on the assumption
that the New Jersey State Police, needing a suspect
and perhaps working in concert with Lindbergh,
coerced and bribed witnesses, altered or manufac-

442

tured evidence, lied in police reports, and denied
Hauptmann adequate representation or access to
witnesses and resources that would have proved his
innocence.
The Facts of the Kidnapping
The kidnapping occurred between 8 and 10 P.M. The
Lindberghs would not normally have been in
Hopewell (they always spent their weekdays in the
Morrow estate in Englewood, New Jersey, several
miles away), but little Charles was said to be suffering from a cold, and as the weather was miserable,
the family delayed returning to Englewood. In the
house at the time were Anne Morrow Lindbergh,
Elise and Oliver Whately (the cook and the butler),
and the baby’s nursemaid, Betty Gow. Charles Lindbergh arrived about 8:30 P.M., having come from
New York City. (He was supposed to have been
away longer that evening, giving a speech at the
Waldorf Astoria hotel. He told investigators he “forgot” the appointment.)
The family dined late, and around 10 P.M., Gow
went into the nursery to check on Charles, Jr. When
she couldn’t find him, she told Charles and Anne
that the baby was gone. Anne raced into the nursery
with Gow, and then Charles went in and discovered
an envelope on the windowsill, which he insisted not
be opened until the police arrived. Later that night,
during the investigation of the grounds, a homemade ladder with a broken rung was found. No
other physical evidence or usable fingerprints were
discovered at the scene.
A week after the kidnapping, a retired teacher
from the Bronx named John Condon received a message from the kidnappers. Police verified that the
purported kidnapper was not a fraud; Condon received some of the kidnapped child’s clothing in the
mail. Negotiations led to midnight meetings in a
Bronx cemetery, and eventually, $50,000 in gold certificates were exchanged with the kidnapper. In
return, Condon was given a letter that stated that the
baby could be found on the “Boad Nelly”—a puzzling reference that neither the police nor Lindbergh
understood. In April, some of the ransom money
began circulating in the Bronx. In May, a truck driver

Lindbergh Baby Kidnapping

Police examining the window from which Charles A. Lindbergh’s baby was kidnapped, Hopewell, New Jersey. (Library of
Congress)

passing through Hopewell reported the discovery of
a small corpse in the woods a few miles from the
Lindbergh home. Though the body was badly
decomposed, the Lindberghs positively identified the
body as their son (it was wrapped in little Charles’s
clothes).
The New Jersey State Police were under intense
international scrutiny. No substantive progress had
been made in the case. The investigation was being
superintended by the chief of the state police, Norman Schwarzkopf (father of the U.S. military’s Gulf
War general), who disavowed all offers of assistance
from the FBI. When the baby’s body was found,
Schwarzkopf boldly announced in the press that the
perpetrators would soon be in custody.
Almost a year and a half later, in September 1934,
following one of the paths of the ransom-money

trail, police arrested Hauptmann at his home in the
Bronx, charging him first with extortion and then,
later, kidnapping and murder.
The prosecution’s case was made up of witnesses
who reportedly identified Hauptmann from the
Bronx cemetery or near the Lindbergh house; handwriting samples that allegedly matched the ransom
notes; the presence of John Condon’s phone number, written in pencil, in Hauptmann’s closet; and a
missing plank from Hauptmann’s attic floor, which
was said to have been used in the ladder at the crime
scene. He was also found to be in possession of most
of the ransom money, which was stored in his garage.
Hauptmann was represented at trial by a flamboyant, alcoholic attorney named Edward Reilly,
who was hired by Hearst Newspapers to put on a
good show before the inevitable conviction. In the

443

Lindbergh Baby Kidnapping

four months before the trial, Reilly spent less than
one hour talking to Hauptmann.
The “airtight” case against Hauptmann has
proved, on closer examination, to be rather porous.
Several researchers (especially Kennedy) have
uncovered the dubious origin of much of the case
against Hauptmann. For example, of the two “eyewitness” accounts of Hauptmann at the crime scene,
one was given by eighty-seven-year-old Amandus
Hochmuth—who was partially blind due to cataracts
(but nonetheless was given a $1,000 “reward” for
coming forward as an eyewitness); the other was an
illiterate and impoverished man named Millard
Whited, who stated both the day after the kidnapping and seven weeks later that he had seen nothing
suspicious in the neighborhood. When police
informed him he would be able to share in the
$25,000 reward money if his testimony proved helpful, he changed his story and said he saw Hauptmann drive by in his car on the day of the abduction.
The writing of Condon’s phone number inside
Hauptmann’s closet? In the years since the trial,
three different reporters who were covering the
case at the time said a fellow reporter from a New
York daily newspaper put it there to create a big
story for the next issue.
Investigators after the fact have disagreed with
the official testimony that the floorboards in Hauptmann’s home matched the wood used for one of the
rungs of the ladder—the infamous “rail sixteen.”
Researchers have pointed out that police did not
originally note a missing floorboard in Hauptmann’s
attic, even though they investigated the house no
less than nine times, looking for incriminating evidence. The missing piece of wood was officially
noticed only after the police had been scouring
Hauptmann’s home for a week. Further, it has been
questioned why Hauptmann, a carpenter who had a
garage full of wood, would have ripped up a piece
of floorboard, and why he would have “planed” it
smooth if it was only going to be a step on a ladder.
Also, why was “rail sixteen” one-sixteenth of an inch
thicker than the rest of the floorboards? (This discrepancy, according to Ahlgren and Monier, caused
then-New Jersey governor Harold Hoffman to
accuse prosecutors of “fabricating the evidence.”)
444

Handwriting experts testified that the ransom
note’s misspellings matched the sample the police
received from Hauptmann during interrogation.
But Hauptmann claimed the police, after twenty
straight hours of questioning, asked him to provide
writing samples and told him how to spell certain
words, such as “rihgt” for “right.”
Regarding the ransom money, Hauptmann said
he was given a package from an acquaintance,
Isidore Fisch, to hold for him. Hauptmann said
Fisch (who, records indicate, journeyed to Germany
and then died shortly after Hauptmann accepted
the package) had owed him money. When he didn’t
return to get the package, Hauptmann began spending some of the money, he testified.
Other questions researchers have puzzled over
include:
1. How could Hauptmann, or anyone outside the
immediate family, have planned a kidnapping from
the Hopewell home on a night when the Lindberghs were always to be found at their Englewood
home?
2. Why would someone attempt a kidnapping during a time when all the lights were on, the domestic
staff—including the nursemaid—was in residence,
and the family was at home having dinner?
3. Hauptmann’s footprints were never found at
the scene. The ladder contained more than 400 sets
of fingerprints. Not one belonged to Hauptmann.
4. Why did Lindbergh and Schwarzkopf refuse
the assistance of the FBI?
5. Why did Hauptmann maintain his innocence—
even after he was offered a commutation of his sentence to life in prison if he would simply confess?
(This offer was available right up until the time he
was executed.)
In 1981, Anna Hauptmann, widow of Richard,
petitioned the New Jersey courts to reopen her husband’s case, based largely on the questions raised in
the decades since his conviction. The court dismissed her appeal. She died in New Holland, Pennsylvania, in 1994. Since then, other authors (most
notably Fisher) have responded to the wave of
“Hauptmann-was-framed” charges with their own
charges of Lindbergh revisionist hysteria and conspiracy theory fever. Several books published in the

Lindsey, Hal

1990s argue unequivocally for the soundness of the
original case against Hauptmann and the paucity of
evidence pointing to anyone else, or to any organized conspiracy. Additionally, not withstanding the
admittedly slack legal representation provided to
Hauptmann, neither the New Jersey courts nor the
New Jersey legislature, after reviewing the transcripts, evidence, and more than 30,000 documents
now available about the case, has seen fit to reconsider the original findings or to censure—or even
question—the legitimacy of police or prosecutor
conduct in the matter.
James Broderick
References
Ahlgren, Gregory, and Stephen Monier. 1993. Crime
of the Century: The Lindbergh Kidnapping Hoax.
Boston, MA: Branden Books.
Behn, Noel. 1994. Lindbergh: The Crime. New
York: Atlantic Monthly Press.
Fisher, Jim. 1999. The Ghosts of Hopewell: Setting
the Record Straight in the Lindbergh Case.
Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Kennedy, Ludovic. 1985. The Airman and the
Carpenter: The Lindbergh Kidnapping and the
Framing of Richard Hauptmann. New York:
Viking.

Lindsey, Hal
The primary reason to consider Hal Lindsey in the
context of conspiracy theory is that Lindsey is perhaps the single most popular writer of biblical
prophecy in the United States and biblical prophecy
is itself a mode of conspiratorial thought. All events
are linked by an overarching logic and are leading
toward some known end—the Second Coming of
Christ. Lindsay is one of the very few writers to ever
have three books on the New York Times best-seller
list simultaneously. His best-known book, The Late
Great Planet Earth (1970), has been translated into
50 different languages and has sold over 35 million
copies. He has since written another twenty books,
regularly conducts pro-Israeli Holy Land tours, runs
an online newsletter, Hal Lindsey Oracle, and
appears on the weekly Trinity Broadcasting Network
news show, International Intelligence Briefing. The
Late Great Planet Earth is a key document in the

early popularization of the mode of religious belief
most common among evangelical Christianity
within the United States—premillennial dispensationalism. To understand Lindsey’s significance,
both within biblical prophesying and within the socalled Christian Zionist Right, it is necessary to
come to a basic understanding of the theology
espoused by his writing.
Premillennialism is the understanding that we are
approaching the millennium: the thousand-year
reign of Christ that follows the Second Coming. Dispensationalism asserts that God progressively
reveals himself over a series of ages or dispensations.
During each dispensation, the onus placed upon
humankind in terms of their responsibility to God
changes. At present, according to Lindsey and most
other evangelicals, we are in the age of the Grace or
the Church age (the sixth of seven dispensations)
during which our only responsibility to God is faith.
The final dispensation, following the rapture—during which the faithful will be called to God’s side—
is the millennial kingdom.
The sense that the millennium is at hand depends upon biblically based interpretations of current events. More specifically, it depends upon specific interpretations of the Book of Revelation. In
this interpretation, the creation of the State of
Israel in 1948 is the event that begins the countdown to the millennium. Israel plays a crucial role
in the premillennial dispensationalist version of the
Last Days—hence the strong support of Israel by
Lindsey, Jerry Falwell, Pat Robertson, and Jimmy
Swaggart, who along with Tim LaHaye (coauthor
with Jerry Jenkins of the immensely popular and
profitable Left Behind series) are core members of
the so-called Christian Zionist Right. (Incidentally,
all of the aforementioned individuals have strong
affiliations with groups funded by Rev. Sun Myung
Moon’s Unification Church.) Without the continuing existence of the State of Israel, the events that
lead up to the final dispensation cannot come to
pass. The centrality of premillennial dispensationalism and its attendant Zionism to the U.S. Christian
Right points to the significance of Lindsey and his
writing to the contemporary political scene. The
centrality of Christian Zionism to both political and
445

Long, Huey

religious life in the United States has redoubled following the terrorist attacks of September 11.
Another key historical element identified by Lindsey is the movement toward the unification of
Europe. Lindsey reads the European Union as the
revived Roman Empire—the reemergence of which
is central to the End Times scenario. One thing that
has complicated Lindsey’s vision of the apocalypse is
the fall of the Soviet Union, which has served as his
candidate for Gog-Magog. Gog-Magog are identified
in the Bible as the nations that Satan will lead upon
his escape from prison at the end of the millennium.
The fall of the Soviet Union has not dissuaded Lindsey from his view: in an article from August 2002
Lindsey notes, “Just when you begin to wonder
where is Gog and Magog in all this . . . Russia has
continued to strengthen ties with all three of the
countries branded the ‘axis of evil’ by President Bush:
Iran, Iraq and North Korea. Hmmm” (Lindsey
2002).
Mark Harrison
See also: Apocalypticism; Millenarianism.
References
Biblical Discernment Ministries. 2003. “Hal
Lindsey: General Teachings/Activities.” http://
www.rapidnet.com/~jbeard/bdm/exposes/lindsey/
lindsey.htm.
Lindsey, Hal. 1970. The Late Great Planet Earth.
Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan.
———. 2002. “Baghdad, Moscow Plan Economic
Pact.” http://www.hallindseyoracle.com.

Long, Huey
A month before his death, Senator Huey Pierce
Long of Louisiana informed the U.S. Senate that his
enemies were planning to assassinate him. Long frequently expressed fears about physical violence, but
the pronouncement soon before the shooting made
his previous statements appear credible. While
attending a legislative session in Baton Rouge on 8
September 1935, Long was fatally wounded in the
halls of the Louisiana State Capitol building.
Allegedly, Dr. Carl Austin Weiss shot Long outside
the doors of the governor’s office, and Long’s bodyguards killed Weiss, shooting him approximately
446

thirty times. Weiss died at the scene, and Long died
about thirty hours later.
As a federal senator, Long had no legal power in
the state legislature, but he exercised dictator-like
control over Louisiana and regularly attended state
sessions. Long was elected as governor in 1928 and
successfully fought impeachment charges in 1929.
Halfway through his term, he won a position in the
U.S. Senate, but refused to vacate the governorship
to the lieutenant governor. Long took his Senate seat
in 1932 after his handpicked successor, Oscar Kelly
Allen, was elected. Long launched a nationwide
campaign for wealth redistribution, known as the
“Share Our Wealth Society,” and waged war on big
business, especially Standard Oil. He engaged in
unethical and illegal practices such as requiring all of
his employees to sign undated resignation letters,
allowing him to dismiss them at whim. Such behaviors earned Long enemies; while he was in power,
there were two political parties in Louisiana: Longs
and anti-Longs. Business interests and conservative
politicians hated him, but his platform received
mass support. At the zenith of his reign, Long controlled nearly every aspect of state and local government, but brought much-needed improvements like
paved roads and schools to Louisiana. He was considered a possible threat to his estranged ally
Franklin D. Roosevelt in the presidential election of
1936 when a bullet stopped his rise to power.
Long’s supporters used the shooting as a campaign issue for the state elections of 1936, claiming
that political opponents were behind the shooting.
Drawing attention to the senator’s prophecy of an
assassination attempt, gubernatorial candidate
Richard Leche and other pro-Longs called the
opposition the “Party of Murder” and the “Assassination Party.” According to the theory, Weiss had
attended a gathering at the DeSoto Hotel in New
Orleans on 22 July 1935 where he and several other
men discussed murdering the senator. One version
even states that the men drew straws to determine
who would actually commit the deed. Long
employees recorded the meeting, and the transcripts served as the basis for Long’s own claim of
an assassination attempt. There was a meeting at
the hotel, but it was a well-publicized anti-Long

LSD

guard George McQuiston refused to testify at an
inquest, leading observers to think that the guards
had something to hide and were conspiring to cover
up the facts. In 1936 K. B. Ponder, an investigator
for Long’s life insurance company, concluded that
the guards shot Long.
Conversely, official investigations in 1935 and
1992 found that Weiss alone was responsible for
Long’s death, but many questions remain. Doctors
never performed an autopsy on Long, and Weiss’s
corpse was not examined until it was exhumed in
1991. Weiss’s .32-caliber pistol and the case file were
missing for fifty years, and it was fifty-six years after
the incident that ballistics tests were performed on
the alleged assassin’s weapon. The analysis was
inconclusive. A spent round found with the gun did
not match bullets fired from the weapon, and the
identity of Long’s killer remains an open question.
Dallas Hulsey

Huey Long rose from poverty to national prominence by
ruthlessly building a powerful political organization in
Louisiana and by shrewdly appealing to the populist
sentiments of that state’s poor. (Library of Congress)

political conference, and most sources agree that
Weiss, who showed little interest in politics, was not
present. Regardless, the conspiracy allegations died
down after pro-Long candidates defeated their
rivals in 1936, and despite campaign promises, the
Longites never brought charges against any of the
alleged conspirators.
Even as pro-Longs blamed Weiss, others were
looking in the opposite direction, claiming that
Long’s bodyguards killed him. Weiss, who might
have been angry about a racial slur against his family or the plans to gerrymander his father-in-law’s
judicial seat, hit Long on the mouth. The guards
responded with gunfire, and the senator took a bullet meant for Weiss. Long did have an unexplained
mouth wound, and the guards’ testimony did not
agree on key points, such as how many shots Weiss
fired or how Long received the lip wound. Body-

See also: Roosevelt, Franklin D.
References
Long, Huey. [1933] 1996. Every Man a King: The
Autobiography of Huey P. Long. New York: Da
Capo Press.
Williams, T. Harry. 1981. Huey Long. New York:
Vintage.
Zinham, David. 1993. The Day Huey Long Was
Shot. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi.

LSD
The hallucinogenic drug lysergic acid diethylamide,
or LSD, was discovered by the Sandoz drug and
chemical corporation in 1943, and within a few short
years both the U.S. military and the newly formed
CIA would be investigating the possible strategic
value of this extraordinarily powerful new substance.
Since a single dose was merely 100 micrograms or so,
10 kilograms—about the amount that could fit into
an agent’s carry-on luggage, for instance—was equivalent to 100 million doses, or enough to incapacitate
the entire population of either the United States or
the Soviet Union. Its strategic importance as a
weapon was thus all too evident, but the CIA was
more interested in its potential as an interrogation
aid or even as a possible “mind-control” tool. Leaving
447

LSD

the research into large-scale deployment to the military’s chemical and biological warfare (CBW) division, the CIA began an extensive program of testing
the drug on individuals.
U.S. intelligence organizations had long been
interested in the possibility of mind control. The
CIA’s World War II predecessor, the Office of
Strategic Services (OSS), had experimented with
marijuana as a possible mind-control agent. And
Stanley Lovell, head of OSS research and development, looked into the possibility of hypnotizing German prisoners and sending them back to Germany
with orders to assassinate Hitler. Though nothing
much came of these efforts, the Communist trials of
the late 1940s, which saw political and military officials confessing to treasonous acts they clearly did
not commit, convinced the CIA that techniques for
radical behavior modification existed and, worse,
that the Soviets had developed them first. With the
perceived threat of Soviet mind control looming on
the horizon, in 1953 the CIA set up MK-ULTRA, a new
project headed by Sidney Gottlieb that was devoted
to studying the operational potential of biological
and chemical materials (including LSD).
The CIA’s testing of LSD proceeded on two
fronts. On the one hand, they decided to make use
of as many official medical research organizations as
they could, and began funding (often covertly)
research on LSD in universities, hospitals, and drug
treatment centers. On the other hand, they also
decided that they needed unwitting subjects whom
they could drug and then observe and even interrogate. The CIA’s need for unwitting subjects was so
intense that agents within project MK-ULTRA agreed
that they could slip each other the drug at any time.
This policy of unwitting testing produced what has
become one of the most publicized events in the
project’s history: the LSD-related suicide of Dr.
Frank Olson of the Army Chemical Corps’ Special
Operations Division (SOD). Olson had a profoundly
negative reaction to the drug, which had been given
to him without his knowledge, and Gottlieb, rather
than offering Olson proper psychiatric help, sent the
disturbed SOD man to one of MK-ULTRA’s own scientists, an immunologist and allergist who had no
psychiatric experience. The MK-ULTRA scientist was
448

unable to salvage the situation, and Gottlieb was
forced to cover up the entire incident after Olson
jumped through the window of his tenth-floor hotel
room. Rather than slowing down the CIA’s experiments with LSD, however, the Olson case merely
made them realize that they needed to start using
different subjects. Gottlieb arranged to have “safehouses” set up in New York and San Francisco
where LSD was administered to unwitting prostitutes, drug addicts, and small-time criminals (i.e.,
those who would be least likely to report the CIA
agents to the police). As the agents developed close
relationships with the prostitutes, they realized that
it was just as easy to pay the women to lure unsuspecting clients back to the safehouse for testing as it
was to test the prostitutes themselves. Furthermore,
while they were at it, the CIA operatives decided to
use the prostitutes for a variety of explorations into
deviant sexual practices that might have future operational value. The prostitutes who participated in
what the CIA code-named “Operation Midnight
Climax” were paid $100 a night for their work.
In the mid-1970s tales of these covert domestic
operations emerged as a result of both investigative
reporting and government inquiries such as the
Rockefeller Commission in 1975 and the Senate
Select Committee on Intelligence in 1977. The CIA
agents’ cavalier approach to drug-testing horrified
the public, but the institutional programs they
covertly funded were often just as shocking. In Lexington, Kentucky, the director of the Addiction
Research Center offered addicts heroin if they “volunteered” for the LSD testing project. Some patients
were kept on LSD for seventy-seven consecutive
days. At McGill University in Montreal patients were
subjected to extensive “depatterning”—a technique
the CIA saw as a possible prelude to mind control—
that involved extensive use of LSD, electroshock
therapy, and sensory deprivation. Patients’ LSDinduced ramblings would be recorded on tape, then,
later the patients would be injected with more LSD
combined with either depressants or stimulants and
left alone in a room to listen to their earlier tape.
In the end, the CIA became convinced that LSD
would not turn out to be the effective mind-control
agent they had hoped it would be. And while they

Lusitania, Sinking of

still dreamed of administering it to foreign leaders in
order to produce erratic and discrediting behavior
(one of Fidel Castro’s cigars was to be coated with
the drug), they discontinued the research begun in
the 1950s by the time the inquiries of the 1970s had
begun (or so they claimed). In the meantime, LSD
had become an important part of the 1960s counterculture, and no doubt this new social significance
is the reason why tales of the CIA’s connection to the
drug were so endlessly fascinating for the public.
(No one seemed to talk quite as much about the
CIA’s experiments with Seconal and Dexedrine, for
example.)
Marlon Kuzmick
See also: Central Intelligence Agency; Drugs; Mind
Control; MK-ULTRA.
References
John Marks. 1979. The Search for the Manchurian
Candidate: The CIA and Mind Control. London:
Penguin.
U.S. Senate. 1977. Select Committee on
Intelligence. Project MK-ULTRA, the CIA’s Program
of Research in Behavioral Modification: Joint
Hearing before the Select Committee on
Intelligence and the Subcommittee on Health and
Scientific Research of the Committee on Human
Resources. 95th Cong., 1st sess. 3 August.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.

Lusitania, Sinking of
The Cunard passenger liner the Lusitania was torpedoed and sunk by a German U-boat on 7 May
1915 off the south coast of Ireland, en route from
New York to Liverpool, resulting in the loss of 1,200
lives, 128 of them American. Allegations of a conspiracy to sink the Lusitania center upon the claim
that the then First Lord of the British Admiralty,
Winston Churchill, colluded with the First Sea
Lord, Admiral Jack Fisher, and other senior leaders
of the Royal Navy, to place the liner in peril, anticipating that heavy loss of U.S. lives would hasten the
intervention of the United States in World War I.
While it is accepted that part of the Lusitania’s cargo
comprised munitions for the Allied war effort, there
have also been suggestions of a conspiracy to con-

ceal both the precise nature of these war supplies
and the military capacity of the ship itself.
The emergence of a conspiracy to sink the Lusitania is usually traced to a conference hosted by the
British Admiralty in Whitehall on 5 May, two days
before the liner was sunk, where a decision was made
to withdraw the Lusitania’s naval escort without notifying the ship, in waters where U-boats were known
to be active. Among others summoned to attend the
meeting was Joseph M. Kenworthy, a lieutenant
commander who worked for naval intelligence, and
whose only prior association with Churchill had been
when Kenworthy submitted a report, commissioned
by Churchill, assessing the political outcomes should
a passenger liner carrying American citizens be
attacked and sunk by the German navy. But the suggestion that Churchill and other senior members of
the admiralty conspired to sink the Lusitania is problematic. Records from the admiralty conference on 5
May indicate that British naval forces stationed in
Ireland were instructed to protect the ship. It is also
a matter of record that at least eight, and possibly
more, warnings of U-boat activity off southern Ireland were communicated to the Lusitania on 6 and 7
May.
Notwithstanding the urgency of these warnings,
and the admiralty’s awareness of the U-boat threat,
a more prosaic explanation for why the liner found
itself unguarded in dangerous waters may lie in the
complacency of the British military. In April 1915
Churchill had written that Britain “enjoyed a
supremacy at sea the like of which had never been
seen even in the days of Nelson.” Assured, they
assumed, of naval supremacy, and with their attention focused on the ongoing campaign in the Dardanelles, the men responsible for British naval policy may simply have paid insufficient attention to
the dangers of U-boat activity closer to home. The
notional desertion of Lusitania by her naval escort
the Juno has been described, even by those who see
a conspiracy, as following the standard pattern for
rotation of patrol ships in the area.
Secret Military Cargo
Suspicions regarding the exact nature of the Lusitania’s cargo have been aroused by discrepancies in
449

Lusitania, Sinking of

the two separate cargo manifests Cunard lodged
with U.S. customs, one before and one after the
ship’s departure from New York. Yet, in order to
keep cargoes secret from German informers operating on the New York docks, it was standard practice for British shipping companies during World
War I to file conflicting or incomplete manifests
before sailing, and nobody has yet demonstrated
convincingly that Cunard actively misled either the
U.S. authorities or the public as to the contents of
the ship’s hold. The day after the Lusitania was torpedoed, for example, the New York Times published full details of the liner’s military cargo in its
edition of 8 May.
The civilian status of the Lusitania has also been
challenged, with allegations that the liner carried a
hidden arsenal that could be rapidly mobilized for
use as necessary. A conspiracy to conceal the Lusitania’s military capacity has even been linked with the
unidentified relative of an unidentified future U.S.
president. But none of the 109 passengers who eventually testified at the two public inquiries into the
disaster recalled seeing guns mounted on the liner.
More intriguing is the debate about what caused
the fateful “second explosion” on board the ship.
Although the admiralty maintained for some years
that U-boat U-20 had hit the ship with two torpedoes, it is now widely accepted that the submarine
fired only one torpedo at the Lusitania, and that the
second catastrophic detonation, the one that sank
the liner so quickly with such huge loss of life, was
caused by an unknown object or substance the ship
was carrying in its cargo. The second explosion has
been explained in a number of ways, ranging from
the lurid (the Lusitania was carrying a cargo of secret

450

explosive powder) to the banal (the ship was sunk by
a detonation of highly flammable coal dust following
the impact of the torpedo). But no comprehensive
explanation for the second explosion has ever been
offered, and the admiralty’s initial insistence on the
“two torpedo” scenario has kept alive the theory of a
high-level cover-up regarding the contents of the
Lusitania’s holds.
As well as the cause of the second explosion, one
further aspect of the Lusitania conspiracy remains
unresolved. In the aftermath of the sinking, early
accounts estimated that the liner had taken to the
bottom of the sea several thousand dollars in cash.
By 1922 these estimates had been revised, with
some commentators valuing the ship’s cargo at $5–6
million, much of it in gold. During the 1950s the
activities of the salvage company Rizdon Beezley
around the wreck revived suspicions of Churchill’s
involvement in the disaster, with allegations that
Churchill had commissioned the company to
remove evidence of contraband from the wreck. To
this day, no convincing explanation has been offered
as to why the Lusitania would have been carrying
millions of dollars of gold into a war zone.
David Holloway
See also: Zimmermann Telegram.
References
Bailey, Thomas A., and Paul B. Ryan. 1975. The
Lusitania Disaster: An Episode in Modern
Warfare and Diplomacy. New York: Free Press.
Churchill, Winston. 1932. Thoughts and Adventures.
New York: Scribners.
Preston, Diana. 2002. Wilful Murder: The Sinking of
the Lusitania. New York: Doubleday.
Simpson, Colin. 1983. Lusitania. New York:
Penguin.

M
Mafia
Although the feared influence of the Mafia has provoked some exaggerated and alarmist conspiracy theories (conspiracy theorists routinely suggest, for
example, that the Mafia was involved in both the
election and murder of John F. Kennedy, the murder
of Marilyn Monroe, and the disappearance of Jimmy
Hoffa), the Mafia in reality also constitutes a dangerous conspiracy. It has a basis in both myth and reality
in that it is a false stereotype and a real organization
intent on exploiting individual and collective vulnerabilities. There is no controlling criminal conspiracy
known as “the Mafia”; instead, the Mafia should be
understood as the popular name for Italian American
organized crime in all its forms. Numerous terms
have been used since the beginning of large-scale
Italian migration to the United States in the late
nineteenth century. These include “the Black Hand,”
“the organization,” “the mob,” “the syndicate,” and
“La Cosa Nostra.”
The Mafia Conspiracy
Local, state, and federal crime-fighting agencies have
long kept close tabs on Italian American organized
crime. The Mafia has been implicated, occasionally
with evidence, in numerous conspiracies. Known to
the Federal Bureau of Investigation as La Cosa Nostra (or LCN), its members provide illicit goods and
services while also using illegal means to control and
distribute otherwise legal goods and services.
U.S. society and law have sent mixed messages
about prostitution, alcohol, drugs, and gambling.

These activities have all been legal at some moments
and under certain conditions and illegal at others. In
those times and places that they have been illegal,
they remained widely available due to the infrastructure of the Mafia. This infrastructure was first
developed during the Prohibition era. Large-scale
bootlegging, smuggling, and distribution organizations emerged in major U.S. cities to meet the
demand for alcohol. The Treasury Department had
little success curbing the supply or the demand,
although Eliot Ness of the Prohibition Bureau of the
Justice Department successfully built a case against
Al Capone on tax evasion charges. With the end of
Prohibition, some organizations turned to gambling.
Cooperation from criminal justice authorities ensured that there would be little opposition to the
forerunner of casino-style gambling in towns like
Hot Springs, Arkansas, Covington, Kentucky, Fort
Lee, New Jersey, and Tampa, Florida. Criminal
organizations from Cleveland, Detroit, and St. Louis
would go on to develop some of the first casinos in
Las Vegas.
The cold war era that followed World War II
brought the largest investigations into organized
crime up to that point. Senator Estes Kefauver led a
widely publicized investigation into organized crime
in interstate commerce in 1951. Although the
Kefauver Crime Committee did uncover real
crimes, it also fantastically suggested that the Mafia
was a shadow government controlling virtually every
aspect of U.S. politics and commerce. Later in the
decade, Senator John McClellan led an investigation
451

Mafia

into labor racketeering. His committee’s chief counsel, Robert F. Kennedy, focused most of his energies
on investigating corruption in the Teamsters Union,
then the nation’s largest labor union. Kennedy’s
interrogations of the Teamsters dynamic president,
Jimmy Hoffa, proved extremely popular with TV
viewers.
Unlike earlier investigations, McClellan’s Senate
Rackets Committee led to significant antiracketeering legislation: the Landrum-Griffin Act. Among
other things, Landrum-Griffin banned those who
had been convicted of certain crimes from taking
leadership positions in labor unions, which signaled
the federal government’s willingness to prosecute
organized criminals. This trend would continue
when Robert Kennedy became attorney general
during his brother’s presidency: from a low of 19 in
1960, organized crime indictments rose to 687 by
1964. Kennedy created a special unit within the Justice Department known as the Organized Crime
and Racketeering Section to monitor and prosecute
gangsters. In 1963, this department convinced
Joseph Valachi to present testimony to the U.S. Senate about his experiences in organized crime. After
being initiated in 1930 into La Cosa Nostra—“This
Thing of Ours”—Valachi participated in the organization’s theft, drug, and homicide crimes. In his testimony, he described his initiation ceremony, the
secrecy oath of omertá, and the bureaucratic structure of New York’s five organized crime families.
The federal government’s strongest weapon
against organized crime came with the Racketeering Influenced Criminal Organization (RICO) law
in 1970, which allows for the seizure of the assets of
those involved in criminal activity. In addition,
RICO made it easier to go after the leaders of criminal organizations by extending the length of prison
sentences of people participating in a pattern of
organized crime over a ten-year period. These new
tools led to some high-profile prosecutions, but in
the 1980s low-level offenders of drug laws became
the targets of aggressive policing and harsh sentences characteristic of the “War on Drugs.”
The turn of the millennium brought several
changes in the nature of organized crime. Revelations of widespread corruption in some of the nation’s
452

most powerful companies inspired arguments that
legitimate corporations were themselves sites of organized crime. For example, the FBI’s “Uptick” undercover operation in 2000 found widespread securities
fraud and brokerage houses run by members of the
Bonanno and Columbo crime families.
The Mafia as Sensational Conspiracy Theory
The involvement of real Italian American criminals
in organized crime is often overshadowed by their
fictional counterparts. It is rarely clear where conspiracy gives way to conspiracy theory. It is clear,
however, that popular culture plays an important
role in the development, elaboration, and reinforcement of the Mafia conspiracy theory. Al Capone the
bootlegger quickly gives way to “Al Capone,” the
character in The Untouchables, or Tony Camonte in
Public Enemy.
Many of these theories have their origins in the
tabloid news or Hollywood cinema, but then quickly
migrate into popular lore and public policy. During
the 1950s, New York Mirror reporters Jack Lait and
Lee Mortimer wrote a popular series of entertaining
“true crime” books that both gained high sales and
inspired the Kefauver investigation. Gossip columnist Walter Winchell wrote sensational “Mobfia” stories and did voiceovers for TV’s The Untouchables,
but he also provided information to J. Edgar Hoover.
The theories would then migrate back into popular
culture in films like 1951’s The Enforcer, based on
Kefauver’s investigation.
Many politicians and public figures draw on the
notoriety of organized crime conspiracies in building their careers. After Prohibition, Eliot Ness became Cleveland’s safety director but lost his bid to
be the city’s mayor. Thomas Dewey began his rise to
the New York governorship by prosecuting gangster
Charles “Lucky” Luciano in 1936. More recently,
Rudolph Giuliani went from a gangbusting U.S.
attorney for the southern district of New York to
mayor of New York City.
The Godfather series of films would perhaps have
the greatest impact on popularizing the Mafia conspiracy in late-twentieth-century America. When
the first film was released in 1972, few Mafia movies
had been made since their heyday in the 1920s. The

Mailer, Norman

first two films in the series captured Academy
Awards in several categories, including Best Picture.
The first film marked a major transformation in the
image of the Mafia in that its focus on the Corleone
family took literally the idea of a “crime family.” The
film’s Italian American themes catered to the 1970s
search for ethnic roots, while its traditional nuclear
families provided a nostalgic look back during a time
of rising divorce rates. Despite these fictions, the
series seemed real: it exhibited the gruesome reality
of violence, an eye for period detail, and a joy with
Italian American food and dialogue that made it difficult for many viewers to distinguish this fictional
crime family from the practice of organized crime.
Many individuals and organizations have worked
hard to discredit the theory of the Mafia. Most
notably, J. Edgar Hoover, the director of the FBI,
denied the existence of the Mafia until the Valachi
revelations of 1963. Beginning in the 1950s, the
Order of the Sons of Italy in America (OSIA), an
Italian American civic organization, began a campaign to eliminate the Mafia from U.S. culture.
They believed it to be a defamatory stereotype with
no basis in reality. In addition to protesting portrayals in the mass media, they lobbied politicians and
government organizations from the FBI to the
United States Postal Service, which pulled the plug
on a planned Godfather commemorative stamp due
to Sons of Italy pressure in 1998. Their efforts to get
The Sopranos taken off cable television have so far
proved unsuccessful.
Lee Bernstein
See also: Federal Bureau of Investigation; Hoffa,
Jimmy; Hoover, J. Edgar; Kennedy, John F., Assassination of; Kennedy, Robert, Assassination of; RICO.
References
Bernstein, Lee. 2002. The Greatest Menace:
Organized Crime in Cold War America. Amherst,
MA: University of Massachusetts Press.
Fox, Stephen. 1989. Blood and Power: Organized
Crime in Twentieth Century America. New York:
Penguin.
Maas, Peter. 1968. The Valachi Papers. New York:
G. P. Putnam’s Sons.
Ruth, David. 1996. Inventing the Public Enemy: The
Gangster in American Culture, 1918–1934.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Woodiwiss, Michael. 2001. Organized Crime and
American Power: A History. Toronto: The
University of Toronto Press.

Mailer, Norman
At the age of twenty-five, Norman Mailer published
The Naked and the Dead (1948), a novel based on
the author’s experiences during the World War II.
The rise of U.S. totalitarianism—a term intended to
include all the powerful sociopolitical forces that
master and inhibit individual freedom—is ominously forecast in the novel, and would become one
of the author’s obsessive concerns. In his prodigious
output of fiction, essays, and journalism over the last
half century or so, Mailer has continued to explore
the corrupting nature of U.S. power structures, finding in the nation’s government, media, armed forces,
commercial behemoths, and mass-market products
the causes as well as the effects of a pervasive spiritual decrepitude. As he implies in his novel Why Are
We in Vietnam? (1967), totalitarianism’s depredations are evident both in individual Americans, who
have generally become incapable of meeting genuine tests of courage, and in government policy,
which showed a similar cowardice by launching a
military campaign in Vietnam against an overmatched opponent.
Mailer’s interest in the ability of powerful men to
manipulate history, including the daily lives of average citizens, is prominent in almost all his work. In
An American Dream (1964), he suggests, rather presciently, the existence of a sinister, shadowy network
of influence involving the highest levels of U.S. government, the Mafia, the CIA, the media, and big
business. Mailer himself has shown a lifetime attraction to this shadowy world, confessing “it would not
have been impossible for me to have spent my life in
the CIA” (Mailer 1991, 1375). However, the author’s
tendency is to locate the ultimate source of watershed events not in the cunning of specific potentates, but in the mysterious struggle of good and evil
in the universe—an unpredictable interaction, influenced by and in turn influencing human lives, which
inevitably generates uncanny “coincidences” whenever the stakes (personal, political, historical) are
453

Malcolm X, Assassination of

high. Mailer’s The Executioner’s Song (1979), a
partly fictionalized account of the last few months of
the life of convicted murderer Gary Gilmore, is
especially concerned with inexplicable patterns in
the world and the temptation to read design into
supposedly random events.
This concern also permeates Mailer’s massive
novel Harlot’s Ghost (1991), whose protagonist, a fictional member of the CIA named Harry Hubbard,
has firsthand knowledge of three decades of cold war
espionage. The CIA is represented as being involved
in numerous foreign and domestic intrigues (including attempts, cosponsored by the Mafia, on Fidel
Castro’s life), while Hubbard and others speculate on
the possibility that some element in the agency was
responsible for organizing or covering up the assassination of President John F. Kennedy. Among other
theories Mailer’s characters entertain (but do not
claim to be able to prove) is the notion that Marilyn
Monroe’s death was a murder arranged either by
John or Robert Kennedy, or by Jimmy Hoffa in an
attempt to frame the Kennedy brothers. Mailer himself played an important role in popularizing
Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories in the
1960s, not least with his call for a new commission to
investigate the case, claiming he “would trust a commission headed by Edmund Wilson before I trusted
another by Earl Warren” (Mailer 1966, 11–13).
Mailer’s Oswald’s Tale: An American Mystery (1995)
is a psychobiography of Kennedy’s alleged assassin,
Lee Harvey Oswald. Armed with voluminous
research into Oswald’s life in the Soviet Union in the
years before Kennedy’s death, including interviews
with members of the KGB who kept the U.S. defector under surveillance, Mailer weighs the evidence
implicating the usual suspects (the Mafia, the CIA,
the KGB, pro- or anti-Castro zealots), and finally concludes that Oswald probably acted alone. Jack Ruby,
the Dallas nightclub owner whose murder of Oswald
was captured on live television, is also judged to have
acted, in all likelihood, without external assistance.

of; Mafia; Monroe, Marilyn; Oswald, Lee Harvey;
Ruby, Jack.
References
Mailer, Norman. 1948. The Naked and the Dead.
New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
———1964. An American Dream. New York: Dell
Publishing.
———. 1966. “The Great American Mystery.” Book
Week Washington Post, 28 August, 1; 11–13.
———. 1979. The Executioner’s Song. Boston:
Little, Brown, and Company.
———. 1991. Harlot’s Ghost. London: Abacus.
———. 1995. Oswald’s Tale: An American Mystery.
New York: Random House.
———. 2000. Why Are We in Vietnam? New York:
Henry Holt and Company.

Geoff Hamilton

Malcolm X, Assassination of
Malcolm X was assassinated on 21 February 1965 at
the Audubon Ballroom in Harlem. The subsequent
murder trial convicted three men, Talmadge Hayer,
Norman 3X Butler, and Thomas 15X Johnson. For
most commentators (e.g., Breitman), Malcolm’s
death left a number of questions unanswered. Not
only did the trial fail to definitively answer who murdered Malcolm, it also failed to answer who sponsored the assassination. The prosecution team
quickly assumed the involvement of the Nation of
Islam (NOI), and failed to track leads that did not
match their assumptions. Focused solely on winning
the case as they defined it, the prosecution worked
with the circumstantial evidence they had without
attempting to find hard facts or the real motive
behind the assassination. To their discredit, the
defense teams shared part of the blame; they failed
to introduce evidence or raise questions that would
seriously weaken the prosecution’s case. Proponents
of various theories have since attempted to solve
some of the questions left unanswered, by positing
the involvement of not only the Nation of Islam but
also other groups with possible motives and means,
including the Harlem Drug Lords, the New York
Police Department (NYPD), the CIA, and the FBI.

See also: Castro, Fidel; Central Intelligence
Agency; Cold War; Hoffa, Jimmy; Kennedy, John F.,
Assassination of; Kennedy, Robert F., Assassination

Harlem Drug Lords Theory
As a staunch and vocal opponent of narcotics, Malcolm often warned audiences against using the

454

Malcolm X, Assassination of

Two policemen in New York City pull a gurney bearing Malcom X after he was downed by an assassin’s bullets at a rally
on 21 February 1965. (Bettmann/Corbis)

“weapon of the white man.” Based largely on the
personal recollections of one man (Farmer), this
theory claims Malcolm’s assassination was nothing
more than a battle over turf, as Harlem drug dealers did not want him driving away customers. The
weakness of this theory lies in the fact that most of
the evidence is anecdotal, and that Malcolm’s antidrug beliefs did little to curb drug use in Harlem,
which continued to rise steadily in the early 1960s
regardless of anything Malcolm said or did.

NYPD Theory
Theorists who believe the police played a direct role
in the assassination often cite the issue of the “Second Man” as evidence (Norden). “The Second Man”
refers to initial press reports that police arrested two
suspects, Hayer and an unnamed individual. Subsequent stories failed to mention the capture of two
individuals, but never corrected the error of the first
reports. Proponents of the “Second Man” theory
argue that the second individual was actually a
455

Malcolm X, Assassination of

police operative, and as soon as the police realized
this, all evidence of a second arrest disappeared.
While the unexplained disappearance of the “Second Man” looks suspicious on the surface, others
explain it away as a simple error committed by the
press trying to meet a story deadline. The “Second
Man,” say some, could actually be Hayer himself.
One officer arrested Hayer, but this officer gave him
over to two other officers for transport. The press
might have questioned the first officer and then the
other two officers, unaware that there was in fact
only one suspect. Once they realized their error, the
press corrected the information in their stories,
overlooking the need to note the reason for the correction to their readers.
More compelling is the argument that the police
played an important indirect role in allowing the
assassination to occur. Although the police claimed
to have a special detail of twenty officers guarding
Malcolm the day of the assassination, only George
Roberts, one of Malcolm’s bodyguards and also an
undercover agent, was actually in the ballroom itself.
The rest of the detail were supposedly stationed in
other rooms of the building and in the hospital
across the street. By keeping such a low profile,
none of the officers assigned to the detail was in any
position to thwart the assassination attempt. In fact,
the officers credited with capturing and transferring
Hayer were not a part of the special detail, but were
simply passing through the area at the time. While
the police may or may not have been directly
responsible for Malcolm’s death, they were clearly
negligent in their duties.
CIA Theory
Some have argued that the CIA viewed Malcolm as
a major threat to national security interests. In
1964, Malcolm’s travels in Africa sparked the interest of the government, specifically the CIA, who
followed Malcolm and kept close tabs on his activities. One of Malcolm’s objectives while in Africa
was to garner the support of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). His attempts to lobby the
OAU to pass a resolution strongly condemning the
racial policy of the United States ultimately failed,
but some suggest these attempts were a serious
456

enough threat for the CIA to eliminate him. While
in Cairo, Malcolm suffered a case of food poisoning
and had his stomach pumped in a local hospital.
Although no proof exists that the CIA placed poison
in his food, speculation surfaced after his death that
the CIA might have been involved.
Internal CIA documents since released through
the Freedom of Information Act indicate that the
CIA had no direct role in any assassination attempts
made on Malcolm X. In 1976, the CIA carried out an
internal review of its files, and an in-house document
dated 30 January 1976 concluded that the CIA only
monitored Malcolm’s actions and never assumed any
active role to stop him. Theorists question the truthfulness of such internal findings, but some question
why the CIA would find it necessary to lie to itself
eleven years after Malcolm’s death (Friedly).
FBI Theory
Malcolm X was still in prison when the FBI started
its first file on him in 1953. He initially caught their
attention when he claimed affiliation with the Communist Party in a letter. Although Malcolm was
never a Communist, merely mentioning his involvement was enough for the FBI to monitor him as a
security threat. Over the next decade, the FBI would
collect thousands of documents in Malcolm’s file.
Under J. Edgar Hoover, the FBI was notoriously
against the civil rights movement, which Hoover
believed was a front for Communists. The FBI
developed different tactics to discredit African
American organizations and leaders, eventually
beginning the Counterintelligence Program (COINTELPRO) to combat groups it viewed as threats to
national security.
Theorists point to two documents that suggest the
FBI’s interest in discrediting Malcolm. The first is an
internal memo dated 22 January 1969 that takes
credit for the split between the Nation of Islam and
Malcolm X. Exactly how much influence the FBI had
in the split remains unclear, but its role was probably
minor. The second document, dated 4 March 1968,
outlined COINTELPRO’s objective to “prevent the rise
of a ‘messiah.’” The document confirmed the FBI’s
fear that Malcolm might have developed into a messiah figure for the African American community, but

The Manchurian Candidate

using these documents to show the FBI’s involvement in Malcolm’s assassination is highly problematic. No credible evidence exists that the FBI ever
did anything more than attempt to discredit Malcolm
(Carson).
Nation of Islam Theory
Although Hayer offered a surprise confession during the original trial, he did not indicate motive or
identify the names of his coconspirators. His claim
that Butler and Johnson played no role in the assassination was ignored. During the trial Hayer denied
any affiliation with the Nation of Islam, but once in
prison, he resumed his Muslim beliefs. In late 1977
and early 1978, Hayer offered two sworn affidavits,
once again confirming the innocence of Butler and
Johnson. With Elijah Muhammad’s death in 1975,
Hayer claimed he no longer felt it necessary to hide
the identities of his fellow assassins, whom he identified as Brother Benjamin, Leon X, Wilbur X, and
William X. The motive they all shared as NOI members was to silence Malcolm, the man dubbed by
the NOI as “the chief hypocrite.” Malcolm threatened to spread not only the news of Muhammad’s
adulterous relationships, but also the knowledge of
the NOI’s rampant fiscal corruption.
While the best evidence suggests that the NOI
had the most plausible motive and was ultimately
responsible for Malcolm’s death, no direct proof
links the assassination to Elijah Muhammad or anyone higher up in the organization than the men who
committed the crime. What is clear is that the harsh
rhetoric used by various members of the NOI, such
as statements made by Boston minister Louis X
[Farrakhan], created a hostile environment for Malcolm, making his assassination a virtual certainty.
Members of the NOI identified Malcolm as the
enemy, and could easily infer that killing Malcolm
was warranted and would be welcomed.
Brett R. Fuller
See also: Central Intelligence Agency; COINTELPRO;
Farrakhan, Louis; Federal Bureau of Investigation;
Hoover, J. Edgar.
References
Breitman, George, et al. 1991. The Assassination of
Malcolm X. 3d ed. New York: Pathfinder.

Carson, Clayborne. 1991. Malcolm X: The FBI File.
New York: Carroll and Graf.
Farmer, James. 1985. Lay Bare the Heart. New
York: Arbor House.
Friedly, Michael. 1992. Malcolm X: The
Assassination. New York: Ballantine Books.
Goldman, Peter. 1979. The Death and Life of
Malcolm X. 2d ed. Urbana, IL: University of
Illinois Press.
Norden, Eric. 1967. “The Murder of Malcolm X.”
The Realist, February, 1–22.

The Manchurian Candidate
The Manchurian Candidate has become an important film among both conspiracy theorists and academics studying conspiracy theory. For the former
it offers a chilling portrayal of government manipulation of individuals and of the secret cabals who
control the United States, while for the latter it provides a fictionalized representation of paranoia and
mind control that offers an insight into a wider cultural paranoid consciousness. Released in 1962, a
year before the assassination of John F. Kennedy,
the film has often been seen as a prescient foretelling of the political assassinations of the 1960s,
although in actuality it is more a product and summing up of 1950s cold war paranoia.
The Manchurian Candidate is based on a novel by
Richard Condon and was directed by John Frankenheimer, and has its origins in stories that emanated
from the Korean War about the brainwashing of
U.S. prisoners of war by Communist forces. The
film begins with the ambush of a group of U.S. soldiers under the command of Major Bennett Marco
(Frank Sinatra) and his unpopular sergeant, the
well-educated Raymond Shaw (Laurence Harvey).
This is followed by several brainwashing sequences
(during which Shaw is brainwashed into becoming a
mind-controlled assassin), after which the narrative
shifts to the United States and the return of Marco
as a serving officer and Shaw as a decorated war
hero. The film then follows the stories of the two figures as Marco attempts to understand his strange
dreams and his failure to comprehend how Shaw
has, in his embedded mind, become a heroic and
well-loved figure, even while he consciously knows
457

The Manchurian Candidate

that he and the rest of the platoon all deeply disliked
him. This leads Marco into an investigation into, and
ultimately a friendship of sorts with, Shaw as he realizes how the latter has been used as a mindcontrolled pawn, while at the same time dramatizing
Shaw’s embedding within a conspiracy to kill a presidential candidate in order to guarantee the nomination and election (on a sympathy vote) of his
despised red-baiting stepfather, Johnny Iselin. During the course of this it is revealed that Raymond’s
mother (played by Angela Lansbury) is his controller
(and who is manipulating him through his unconscious incestuous desires, with the implication that
she did this before his Korean brainwashing) and
that the Communist plot to elect Iselin has deeper
implications. The film ends with Shaw realizing he is
a pawn and ultimately breaking his programming by
shooting Iselin and his mother rather than his intended target.
The film’s significance for conspiracy theory lies
in its mapping of the pathology of brainwashing and
in its portrayal of the tangled webs and conspiracies
of cold war politics. In both cases, nothing is what it
seems and there is a sense that there are hidden
realities to be uncovered beneath the surface of
appearance. This is most obvious in the form of the
mind-controlled Shaw, who has a surface personality
and a deeper embedded assassin identity that is triggered by the appearance of the Queen of Diamonds
playing card, after which he obeys the first command he is given. This is illustrated in one memorable scene when he jumps into a lake in Central
Park after the accidental appearance of the card and
a random comment when he meets Marco in a bar.
The problematization of surface appearances is particularly shown in the opening brainwashing
sequences, where the application of mind control
alters the perceptual experiences of the soldiers.
The soldiers do not see the conference room where
they are being brainwashed, but instead believe that
they are attending a garden party where they discuss
issues such as flower arranging with prim middleclass women in floral dresses. Nor do any of them
see Shaw kill another soldier on the command of
one of his controllers because they are so embedded
in the fantasy that has been created for them.
458

These sequences, and Raymond’s embedded
personality, suggest that “reality” and identity in
both mind control and conspiracy are constructed
forms rather than objectively existing phenomena
and that they can be altered according to the whim
of the conspiracy controller. This is played out in
the political narrative of the film in which reality
twists and turns with the revelations, first, that it is
Raymond’s mother who is his U.S. controller and
then that the Communist plot involves the election
of Iselin. The film, therefore, maps a complex relationship between identity and reality in the suggestion that both are constructs, because if one cannot
be guaranteed, then neither can the other. The film
does, in the end, rescue both with the awakening of
the “real” Raymond and his concomitant ability to
see “reality” for what it is, but there are still doubts
as to whether the self or the world can be trusted
anymore.
The uncertainties that the film raises are one of
the reasons why it has been so influential in conspiracy theory, which is based on both the distrust of
surface appearance and the belief in a deeper reality
that is as knowable as the reality that Shaw finally
perceives. The film has also been influential because
of the widespread conspiracy belief that there are
real “Manchurian Candidates,” but programmed by
the CIA in its MK-ULTRA program, rather than by the
Chinese or Russians. Such an idea was popularized
by John Marks in his study of MK-ULTRA, The Search
for the Manchurian Candidate, and has subsequently been applied to people such as Lee Harvey
Oswald (through his hypnosis by David Ferrie) and
Sirhan Sirhan. The idea has also remained in currency, making its appearance in recent years in relation to figures as diverse as John McCain, who many
Vietnam veterans believe to have been brainwashed
by the Vietnamese Communists; Ted Kaczynski,
who, it is claimed, embarked on his terror campaign
as a result of the MK-ULTRA programming he underwent while he was at Harvard; and the Columbine
killers, Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, who have
been seen either as brainwashed victims of a
conspiracy-controlled media industry or as part of a
plot to outlaw guns in the United States.
Fran Mason

Manson, Charles

See also: Central Intelligence Agency; Film and
Conspiracy Theory; Mind Control; MK-ULTRA.
References
Marcus, Greil. 2002. The Manchurian Candidate.
London: BFI.
Marks, John. 1991. The Search for the Manchurian
Candidate. New York: W. W. Norton.

Manson, Charles
The leader of a bizarre, conspiracy-minded cult that
committed several murders, Charles Manson (often
known simply as “Charlie”) became a notorious figure in the late 1960s, and the center of a great deal
of conspiracy-minded speculation about his true
motives. To many, Manson’s actions constituted a
conspiracy to bring about the end of civilized society and the dawn of a new age of terror.
Born in Cincinnati, Ohio, 1934, Manson spent
his first term in reformatory school at the age of
nine. By the time he drifted to San Francisco in
1967, Manson had spent most of his adult life in jail,
mostly for such offenses as car theft and credit-card
fraud. He also worked some time as a pimp. He
found himself in the midst of the new psychedelic
drug culture in the 1960s, amidst the hippies of the
Haight-Asbury district who took LSD, smoked pot,
and called themselves flower children. HaightAshbury in the 1960s was a mecca for the nation’s
disenchanted young people and they came by the
thousands to participate in what they saw as a great
social experiment. No one cared that Manson had
been a jailbird; on the contrary, it was regarded as
being greatly to his credit.
For Manson, religion was a strong force that he
used to manipulate the minds of his followers. At
the age of thirty-four he decided he wanted a “family,” and consequently started to attract a group of
followers, many of whom were young women with
troubled lives, rebelling against their parents and
society. All of Manson’s followers were weak willed,
naïve, and easy to lead and in addition Manson used
LSD and amphetamines to alter his followers’ personalities. He assembled a destructive, doomsday
cult around himself, which the media later called
the Family. At one time, it numbered in excess of

100 individuals at the Spahn Ranch, some 30 miles
northwest of Los Angeles. Manson was referred to
both as “God” and “Satan” by his followers. As the
Family’s guru, he claimed to be a reincarnation of
Jesus Christ.
By 1968 Manson was prophesying an apocalyptic
racial war in the United States. He became convinced that songs on the Beatles’ psychedelic White
Album contained coded references to the coming
apocalypse, notably the tracks “Helter Skelter”
(Manson’s term for the race war that would lead to
Armageddon) and “Revolution 9” (which he understood to be a veiled reference to the Book of Revelation, chapter 9, which describes four angels setting
out to kill a third of mankind; Manson took these
four angels to be the Beatles). Manson was also associated with the Process Church of Final Judgement,
one of whose key doctrines was reconciliation between Christ and Satan. According to Manson, his
Family would survive the prophesied racial holocaust because they would be hiding in the desert
safe from the chaos of the city. He took from Revelation the concept of a “bottomless pit,” the entrance
to which he asserted was a cave underneath Death
Valley that led down to a city of gold, and where
Manson and his Family planned on waiting out the
war. His idea was that when the war was over the
Manson Family would be one of the only white families left, leaving them to rule over the remaining
victorious blacks (Bugliosi and Gentry, 321). When
Armageddon failed to come, Manson took matters
into his own hands and began plotting a way to hasten the desired carnage. During the summer of 1969
Charles instructed some members of the Family to
begin a series of mass murders.
The first, called the Tate homicides, occurred on 9
August 1969 at the home of Sharon Tate, wife of the
film director Roman Polanski. Three victims were
shot and/or stabbed multiple times on the grounds of
the estate. These were Abigail Folger, Steven Parent,
and Voiytek Frykowski. Sharon Tate and Jay Sebring
were murdered inside the house. Tate, eight months
pregnant at the time, died from numerous stab
wounds; Sebring died of blood loss. Both had also
been hanged over a rafter. The next homicides, the
LaBianca murders, occurred two days later in the
459

McCarthy, Joseph

home of Leno and Rosemary LaBianca. They were
found stabbed to death with dozens of wounds.
The officials working on the two investigations
were the Los Angeles Sheriff’s Office (LASO) for
the LaBianca case and the Los Angeles Police
Department (LAPD) for the Tate murders. Lack of
communication between the two law enforcement
entities put both cases in jeopardy several times during the investigations. In addition there were also
several mistakes made in the preservation and collection of evidence. The police appear to have been
stunned by the horrific details at the mass murder
crime scenes, and they badly bungled the task of collecting evidence: for example, they were unable to
find the clothing worn by the murderers (a television
news crew was able to locate the clothing later).
A major break in the case happened when Family member Susan Atkins was arrested on a charge
of prostitution. While in prison, she talked to her
cellmate about having been involved in the Tate
murders, and Manson and three of his followers
(Patricia Krenwinkel, Susan Atkins, and Leslie Van
Houten) were charged with the Tate/LaBianca
murders. The trial was spectacular: Manson spent
much of the time with his back to the judge and his
actions were repeated by his codefendants and
other followers. He shaved his head and carved a
swastika on his forehead; his Family followed suit.
All four were found guilty and sentenced to execution. Manson, along with other Family members,
also later received a death sentence for the Gary
Hinman and Donald Shea killings, which were subsequently discovered to have been carried out by
Manson’s cult. The death penalties were commuted
to life imprisonment in the 1970s when California
law was changed.
Many commentators wondered if Manson and his
Family were connected to other conspiratorial
forces, and this speculation was reignited when one
of his followers, Lynette “Red” “Squeaky” Fromme,
attempted to assassinate President Gerald Ford on 5
September 1975. Fromme was tried, convicted, and
imprisoned for life in the same year. Her motive
appears to have been to publicize Manson’s request
for a retrial, and his concern about the environment.
Niran Abbas

460

See also: Mind Control.
References
Bugliosi, V., and C. Gentry. 1974. Helter Skelter: The
True Story of the Manson Murders. New York:
Bantam Books.
Fillmer, Deborah K. 2002. “Forensic Science and
the Charles Manson Murders.” http://www.cris.
com/~dfillmer/Manson.htm.
Terry, Maury. 1989. The Ultimate Evil. New York:
Bantam Books.

McCarthy, Joseph
Arguably the most successful conspiracy theorist in
U.S. history, Joseph McCarthy (1908–1957) served
as senator from Wisconsin from 1946 until his death.
His tenure took place during the early years of the
cold war, when Americans feared the worst about
their ability to fend off the threat of international
communism. The senator both exacerbated and
exemplified these anxieties by staking his career on
the claim that various federal agencies had been infiltrated by Communists, who wished to overthrow the
U.S. government. These double agents, McCarthy
argued, operated conspiratorially to destroy the
American way of life by posing as loyal American citizens, then working their way into important government posts. McCarthy proved notoriously unsuccessful in unmasking actual Communists, but the
suspicion generated by his investigations ruined
many a career. Although the senator’s crusade garnered him no small amount of opposition, many
feared that opposing him would bring their own loyalties into question. McCarthy’s willingness to make
unsubstantiated public accusations, and his reckless
disregard for any standard of evidence, served to create a reign of terror that the name “McCarthyism”
still invokes today.
Born and raised near Appleton, Wisconsin, Joseph
McCarthy never lacked for ambition and drive. At
fourteen he quit school, then quickly founded a
thriving small business raising chickens; later he
managed a prosperous local grocery store. Growing
restless, McCarthy’s enthusiasm turned toward finishing his education, and at twenty years of age, he
completed an entire course of high school study in

McCarthy, Joseph

Senator Joseph McCarthy. (Library of Congress)

one year. A Catholic, McCarthy next attended Marquette, the Jesuit college in Milwaukee, then graduated from law school in 1935. After briefly working
in a legal partnership, the future senator lost his first
election, running for district attorney as a Democrat.
Two more years as an attorney prepared the aspiring politician for his first office—in 1939 he was
elected a Wisconsin circuit judge. Though he had
little name recognition or public demand for his services, McCarthy created support through tireless
campaigning and, in a pattern that would continue

throughout his career, some disingenuous mudslinging against his opponents. During World War II, the
new lieutenant served as an intelligence officer at
Bougainville in the Solomon Islands, but kept Wisconsin politics foremost in his mind. In an effort to
maximize the political value of his military service,
McCarthy kept his judgeship, fabricated a record as
“Tail-Gunner Joe,” and earned himself a citation by
forging his commanding officer’s signature.
Upon his return home, McCarthy could see something others did not: the fading fortunes of Senator
461

McCarthy, Joseph

Robert LaFollette. A member of Wisconsin’s leading
political family, LaFollette had initially been elected
over twenty years before as a Republican. In the
wake of the Depression, the senator and his brother,
Wisconsin’s governor Phil LaFollette, found themselves to be out of step with the Republican Party in
a heavily Republican state. The siblings founded the
Progressive Party of Wisconsin, and LaFollete’s popularity kept him his seat despite the switch. When
their political organization disbanded in 1944 after
Phil’s run for the presidency against Franklin D.
Roosevelt, LaFollette had little choice but to return
to the understandably resentful Republicans.
McCarthy sensed the possibility for an upset, and
ran against the incumbent in the 1946 Republican
primary. During the campaign, McCarthy said little
about substantive issues, preferring instead glossy
photographs of himself in full military regalia and
the slogan, “Congress needs a tail-gunner.” But the
returning hero indefatigably outcampaigned and
outspent the incumbent, who took little notice of the
local judge and preferred to stay in Washington.
McCarthy won the Republican nomination in a tight
race and had no trouble in the general election.
The new senator quickly established a name for
himself among the Washington elite as an ambitious
and slightly boorish publicity hound who thought
often of himself, but seldom of the traditions of the
Senate or the respect due to senior colleagues. As
McCarthy searched for an issue by which he could
define himself early in his first term, he vigorously
flogged one idea then the next with little thought of
political prudence or ideological consistency. Nearing the end of his first term, McCarthy had alienated much of the Senate and found himself without
a major committee assignment—he needed something that would put him back in the good graces of
his colleagues and the voters. In Wheeling, West
Virginia, Senator McCarthy found his issue. On 9
February 1950 several witnesses claimed he told
the Ohio County Women’s Republican Club,
“While I cannot take the time to name all of the
men in the State Department who have been
named as members of the Communist Party and
members of a spy ring, I have here in my hand a list
of 205 . . . names that were known to the Secretary
462

of State and who nevertheless are still working and
shaping the policy of the State Department.”
Shortly thereafter the Senator told reporters he
had a list of 207 names, then 57. In truth McCarthy
had no list, and the numbers themselves usually
came from mischaracterized or dated research that
had been made public by others long before. Irresponsible and unsupported as the accusations were,
they nonetheless thrust McCarthy into the public
eye. He had the attention of the press, the Senate,
and the Truman administration. The Senate convened a committee, chaired by Maryland Democrat
Millard Tydings, to investigate the charges. As a
member of the Tydings committee, McCarthy
made far more accusations than he could support.
Most observers found his performance in that
forum to be irresponsible and unfair, but the junior
senator from Wisconsin was successful in gaining
the publicity he craved.
For the next four years, McCarthy was the
nation’s most well-known and vehement red-baiter.
Having shrewdly maneuvered himself into the
chairmanship of the unpopular Senate Committee
on Government Operations, he appointed himself
chairman of the Permanent Subcommittee on
Investigations, where he had the authority and the
budget to investigate “government activities at all
levels.” McCarthy launched investigations into
Communist infiltration of numerous government
agencies, such as the Voice of America—the radio
network run by the State Department—and the
Overseas Library Program. McCarthy also accused
any number of government employees of being
Communists, including such high-ranking officials
as General George Marshall and Secretary of State
Dean Acheson.
McCarthy’s downfall came about as the result of
many factors, but perhaps two loom largest overall.
First, in the face of relaxing cold war tensions, fewer
Americans believed the Communist threat to justify
the extreme measures advocated by McCarthyism.
Second, McCarthy did not ease up on his attacks
on the executive branch after Dwight Eisenhower,
a member of his own party, became president
in 1952. Although the Republicans had seen
McCarthy as a valuable asset in constructing their

McCarthy, Joseph

Senator Joseph McCarthy chats with his attorney, Roy Cohn, during Senate subcommittee hearings on the McCarthyArmy dispute. (Library of Congress)

tough-on-communism image, none of them wanted
him attacking their own administration. On Capitol
Hill, patience and tolerance for McCarthy was on
the wane.
The immediate cause of the senator’s fall from
grace, however, was the so-called Army-McCarthy
hearings. Held in the Senate in 1954, they concerned the accusation that Roy Cohn, McCarthy’s
top aide, had abused his position by trying to win
special treatment for another McCarthy aide, Private G. David Schine, who had been recently
drafted. Army officials alleged that Cohn had
threatened them with investigations of Communist
infiltration were he not to get his way. McCarthy
responded with the charge that it was the army that
had acted improperly; it had threatened to give
Schine poor assignments unless already ongoing

investigations were called off. The ensuing hearings
were broadcast on television, and provided a testament to McCarthy’s declining influence. Forty million Americans watched or heard him, many for the
first time, witnessing his vituperative personal
attacks and merciless accusations. By the end of the
year, Joseph McCarthy had been censured by the
U.S. Senate. Though he remained in that body until
his death two years later, the discredited McCarthy
was never again an important political player.
Americans had feared the spread and influence of
communism long before the cold war. The first red
scare and the Palmer Raids (1919–1920) took place
almost immediately after the 1917 Russian Revolution, and the House Committee on Un-American
Activities dates to 1938. Yet in the cold war era, the
conspiratorial view of communism itself came to
463

Mexican-American War

dominate U.S. anticommunist discourse. McCarthy
is perhaps the best representative of this trend.
Believing the United States to be engaged in a
Manichean life-or-death struggle, the senator did
not see communism as an alternative political philosophy. Instead, it was the banner of an opposing
and nefarious force that would stop at nothing to rid
the earth of Americanism. In this view, both the
standards of evidentiary rigor and those of justice
were dispensable luxuries. McCarthy’s approach is
thus a textbook example of what historian Richard
Hofstadter called, in his 1964 essay of the same
name, “the paranoid style in American politics.”
According to Hofstadter, the paranoid style can be
distinguished not only by its conspiratorial tone, but
by its absolutist framework of good and evil and its
penchant for the accumulation of facts buttressed by
a “curious leap of imagination that is always made at
some critical point in the recital of events.” In this,
as in so many aspects, Senator Joe McCarthy serves
as a perfect symbol for his time.
Mike O’Connor
See also: Chambers, Whittaker; Hiss, Alger; House
Un-American Activities Committee; John Birch
Society; Nixon, Richard; Red Scare.
References
Buckley, William F., and L. Brent Bozell. 1954.
McCarthy and His Enemies: The Record and Its
Meaning. Chicago, IL: Henry Regnery Company.
Fried, Richard M. 1990. Nightmare in Red: The
McCarthy Era in Perspective. New York: Oxford
University Press.
McCarthy, Joseph [1952] 1977. McCarthyism: The
Fight for America. New York. Arno Press.
Oshinsky, David M. 1983. A Conspiracy So
Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy. New York:
The Free Press.

Mexican-American War
Numerous conspiracy theories center on the controversial war fought between the United States
and Mexico between 1846 and 1848. One theory
states that the war was a product of a conspiracy by
southern U.S. congressmen to gain more southern
territory, and, therefore, gain more political power.
Another view suggests that it was U.S. President
464

James K. Polk who initiated a complex conspiracy to
start a “just” war against Mexico. Yet a third theory
puts the blame for starting the war on a conspiracy
among an aggressive Mexican press.
As early as the Missouri Compromise (1820), the
U.S. Congress had made attempts at balancing
political power between the free and slave states.
This balancing act continued throughout what historians call the “era of sectional conflict,” and ended
only with the outbreak of the U.S. Civil War. Abraham Lincoln was one of many politicians who saw a
war with Mexico as detrimental. He and many others believed that the acquisition of southern territory would offset the balance of political power.
Both before and after the war, contemporary abolitionists, including prominent spokesmen in both
the northern Democrat and Whig Parties, accused
the so-called Slave Power, a suspected cabal of
southern oligarchs bent on expanding slavery and
the southern way of life throughout the Western
Hemisphere, of arranging the war to accomplish
their ends.
Though many at that time believed that President Polk was part of the Slave Power conspiracy,
others then and since have pointed to Polk himself
as the key conspirator in instigating the war. Polk
was a prominent advocate of Manifest Destiny, the
belief that it was the God-given destiny of the
United States to spread from the Atlantic Ocean to
the Pacific. Mexico’s more northerly provinces—
and in the minds of some, all of Mexico—were thus
a legitimate target for U.S. expansion. Polk lent
vocal support to this position during his campaign
for the presidency, announcing his strong support
for the annexation of Texas, which was currently
being considered by Texas President John Tyler.
According to Anson Jones (the final president of the
Republic of Texas), Polk sent agents to Texas to try
to persuade him to provoke hostilities with Mexico
while the annexation process was taking place,
bringing the United States into a territorial war in
defense of one of its states and fixing the responsibility for the war on Mexico. This suspected conspiracy, which anticipated the Mexican-American
War by eleven months, did not succeed only
because Jones would have no part in it.

Mexican-American War

Having failed in this conspiracy, Polk attempted
the purchase of New Mexico, California, and the
disputed land in Texas between the Nueces River
and the Rio Grande. However, it soon became
painfully clear to Polk that, after losing Texas to
U.S. annexation, Mexico had no intention of parting
with any more of its land. At this point, theory
holds, Polk initiated another and even more complex conspiracy by ordering General Zachary Taylor
with a large army to station himself just inside the
disputed territory southwest of the Nueces River.
When hostilities failed to materialize, Polk ordered
Taylor to the mouth of the Rio Grande, which was
the southernmost fringe of the border claimed by
Texas. Once there, Taylor built a fort and blockaded
the river. At the same time, a U.S. military exploring party under John C. Fremont moved into California’s Salinas Valley and Polk secretly instructed
the navy to invade California should any hostilities
break out between the United States and Mexico.
These actions proved sufficient to provoke Mexico. A detachment of the Mexican army defending
the port city of Matamoros fought an engagement
with some of Taylor’s troops, killing eleven and
wounding another five. Now able to claim that Mexico had “shed American blood upon American soil,”
Polk went before Congress and asked for a declaration of war. Thus, according to this theory, a complicated conspiracy initiated by the U.S. president succeeded in starting a war. However, whether this was
to accomplish his own aims or those of the Slave
Power remains at issue.
Relating to this presidential conspiracy is another
that points in a completely different direction.
Claiming that the treaty that fixed the southern
boundary of Texas at the Rio Grande had been
signed under duress, Mexico repudiated both that
boundary and even Texas’s right to exist as an independent republic. Thus annexation of Texas by the
United States was regarded as an invasion of Mexican sovereignty and Mexico immediately broke off
all diplomatic relations. Although government and
military leaders in Mexico did not want war with the
United States, some have pointed to a conspiracy
among the nationalistic Mexican press, which enflamed public opinion sufficiently to force a more

James K. Polk served as president of the United States
from 1845 to 1849. During his administration, more than
one million square miles of new territory were added to
the nation. (Library of Congress)

aggressive policy. Polk’s efforts, whether the product of a conspiracy or not, fed into the aims of this
group of journalists, providing ammunition for a
barrage of scathing editorials arguing that Mexico
must go to war, both in retaliation for the annexation of Texas and to dissuade the U.S. from seeking
to acquire more territory in the southwest. The bottom line was that Mexico’s national pride was at
stake. According to this view, this culminated in the
skirmish along the Rio Grande, which sparked the
beginning of the war.
The Mexican-American War ended with the Treaty
of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848), which ceded nearly
one-third of Mexico’s territory to the United States. In
return, the United States paid Mexico $15 million and
agreed to allow Mexicans living on the land to remain
if they chose to do so.
Rolando Avila

465

Microsoft

See also: Slave Power; Zimmerman Telegram.
References
Brack, Gene M. “Mexican Opinion, American
Racism, and the War of 1846.” Western Historical
Quarterly 1 (2): 161–174.
Price, Glen W. 1967. Origins of the War with
Mexico: The Polk-Stockton Intrigue. Austin and
London: University of Texas Press.
Richards, Leonard L. 2000. The Slave Power: The
Free North and Southern Domination,
1780–1860. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
University Press.
Qualife, Milo M., ed. 1910. The Diary of James K.
Polk During His Presidency, 1845–49. 4 vols.
Chicago, IL: McClurg.

Microsoft
Microsoft has repeatedly surfaced in conspiracy
lore, especially with the growth of the Internet.
Since its 1975 founding by Harvard dropout Bill
Gates and his high-school friend Paul Allen,
Microsoft has steadily occupied a larger and larger
slice of the software market. The company’s initial
coup came with winning a contract for what eventually became MS-DOS, and then arranging with IBM
to keep the rights to the operating system software.
The introduction of Microsoft Office and Windows
in the early 1990s cemented the company’s dominant industry position.
Soon after September 11, an email circulated
alleging that Microsoft had built a secret code into
its Microsoft Word Wingdings font, predicting the
attacks on the World Trade Center. When the characters Q33NY—incorrectly alleged to be the flight
number of one of the planes—are converted to
Wingdings in Microsoft Word, the result is a plane,
two symbols supposed to resemble buildings, a
skull-and-crossbones, and a Star of David:

A similar rumor had surfaced earlier about the
characters NYC, which allegedly had an antisemitic
meaning when converted to Wingdings: a skulland-crossbones, Star of David, and raised thumb:
466

In both cases, Microsoft had to issue official
statements denying the coincidence.
Microsoft has also been the subject of government-spying fears (akin to those surrounding
Inslaw’s alleged spy software, PROMIS) in connection with a security key built into its software. In September 1999, Andrew Fernandez, the chief scientist
at a Canadian software firm called Cryptonym,
announced the existence of an unaccounted-for
security key in Windows NT 4.0 Service Pack 5, mysteriously labeled “NSAKey.” Rumors abounded on
the Internet as to whether this was something
Microsoft had built into Windows security in order
to allow the National Security Agency (NSA) to spy
on Windows users. The same rumor resurfaced in
2002, with the release of the company’s Palladium
security initiative.
Microsoft has also been the subject of much conspiracy parody, including articles claiming to link it to
the Illuminati and numerogical analyses of Gates’s
name. In 2002, Los Angeles filmmaker Brian Flemming released Nothing So Strange, a “mockumentary” that investigates a JFK-style conspiracy around
the assassination of Bill Gates. The film alludes to
names familiar from the Kennedy assassination,
including Alex Hidell (one of Oswald’s aliases) and
Debra Meagher (a reference to Sylvia Meagher, an
early researcher).
So what makes Microsoft a target for conspiracy
theories? First, Gates’s monolithic presence, legendary competitiveness, and paranoia have made
him a nationally known figure on the scale of Nelson
Rockefeller. As the Justice Department investigation
of Microsoft indicates, it is a large, successful corporation that has not hesitated to use its success to
expand its dominance. Within the technology industry, Microsoft has a reputation as a company that
steals other companies’ ideas and turns them into
mediocre but wildly selling products. Software companies like Netscape, Norell, WordPerfect, and
Lotus have all felt the financial sting of competing
with the behemoth based in Redmond, Washington,
and new companies know that they have only a small

Militias

window in which to succeed before Microsoft releases a competing product. On the flip side, Microsoft itself has made accusations that its Justice Department prosecution results from collaboration
between Microsoft’s competitors, including Netscape
(now part of AOL/Time Warner), Sun Microsystems,
and Oracle Corporation.
Andrew Strombeck
See also: Hackers; Internet; National Security
Agency; September 11.
References
Glasner, Joanna. 2001. “MS Denies Wingding Thing,
Again.” Wired News. http://www.wired.com/news/
business/0,1367,47042,00.html.
Heileman, John. 2001. Pride Before the Fall: The
Trials of Bill Gates and the End of the Microsoft
Era. New York: HarperCollins.
Markoff, John. 1999. “A Mysterious Component
Roils Microsoft.” The New York Times, 4
September, A8.
Website
Nothing So Strange: http://www.nothingsostrange.
com.

Militias
Although being armed in the United States is by no
means a novelty, during the early 1990s the collection of marginalized groups that comprised the
right-wing “Patriot” community found their ranks
swelling as significant numbers of newly disaffected
Americans joined “citizens militias” across the
United States. Strongest in the rural heartland of
the West, Midwest, and South, at its zenith in 1996
the movement had militias active in all fifty states
and numbered perhaps as many as 50,000 members, with several millions of supporters and sympathizers. Some militia leaders have claimed total
membership figures as high as 10 million, which is
frankly far fetched; federal agents have suggested
that supporters could number in the millions
(Abanes, 23). Perhaps more realistically, others suggest a total militia membership of between 20,000
and 60,000 (Berlet and Lyons, 289).
Ostensibly defensive in posture, mobilizing in
particular against gun laws and as a defiant response

to the federal outrages at Ruby Ridge (1992) and at
Waco (1993), the militia movement was remarkable
and unusual not only for claiming to be socially
inclusive, apparently able to recruit African Americans, Hispanics, Jews, and middle-class professionals, but also for utilizing what some have termed
“fusion paranoia”—that is, conspiracy theories not
just to the right of the political spectrum, but also
those incorporating the arguments to the left
(Kelly). However, the view that the militia movement was progressive was sharply contradicted by
many analysts. One commentator saw the militias as
acting as “recruiting pools” for the racist underground, pointing out that the same underground
spawned Tim McVeigh, the Oklahoma City bomber
(Ridgeway, 16–17). And as early as 1994, the various
“watchdog” organizations that monitor the activities
of the far right were raising the alarm that racists
and antisemites were lurking in the background, disguising their true ideology behind constitutionalist
arguments (Dees and Corcoran; Mulloy, 145–148).
The “constitutionalist militias” that have since
become a permanent feature of the antigovernment
movement are united only in terms of their opposition to the “New World Order”—an elitist conspiracy to create a global socialist tyranny. The degree
to which racism and antisemitism dominate this
coalition is highly questionable, and it is the nature
of conspiracy theories that holds the key to understanding the role and significance of the militias.
What the Militias Believe
Can we really describe the militias as a movement?
Arguably, the exercising of gun rights represents only
a common strategy among diverse groups (such as
survivalists; the advocates of common law who
declare themselves “sovereign citizens”; militant
antiabortionists; and pro-gun activists), but this does
not necessarily represent a common ideology or set
of principles. Nonetheless, the term “militia movement” is widely used to refer to those who frame
their activity in terms of defending the U.S. Constitution, and who argue that the Second Amendment
of the Bill of Rights (“A well regulated militia, being
necessary to the security of a free state, the right of
the people to keep and bear arms, shall not be
467

Militias

infringed”) is the one that guarantees all the other
constitutional rights. The only real issue around
which the movement coheres is opposition to gun
control, which is seen as a precursor to “tyranny”
(Mulloy, 17; 48). “The individual right to bear military arms is a fundamental and undergirding principle of our Republic,” argues a prominent pro-militia
journalist, and therefore, he concludes, “upon its
removal the entire national government would
become an illegitimate tyranny” (Suprynowicz, 315).
The spirit of rebellion against gun laws is summed
up in the phrase, “You can have my gun when you
pry it from my cold, dead hands,” and it is the symbolic importance of the Second Amendment that
guides the militia movement, tied into the ideology
of nationalism: “This refusal to submit to tyranny is
not simply about firearms. It is about human rights,
it is about the rule of law, and it is about the continuance of this great nation” (Puckett).
How can it be that the militias, who present themselves as “Patriots” in defense of U.S. values, are also
“antigovernment”? This can only be answered by
understanding the politics of nationalism. The FBI’s
special report of 1999, Project Megiddo, which discussed the possibility of civil disorder at the start of
the new millennium, listed the following criteria as a
guideline for what constitutes a militia: “(1) a domestic organization with two or more members; (2) the
organization must possess and use firearms; and (3)
the organization must conduct or encourage paramilitary training.” Jon Roland, of the pro-militia
Constitution Society, argues that this definition is not
the one implied in the U.S. Constitution, especially
the Second Amendment, and that “the word militia
means defense service, and is applicable to any one
or more persons engaged in the defense of the community.” Roland cites George Mason, who defined
the militia as “the whole people, except for a few
public officials,” and he describes the FBI’s mentality in dealing with the militias as “essentially fascist”
(Roland). This accusation—that federal employees
and “socialist” politicians such as the Clintons are
“fascists”—is a very common one in militia propaganda. By leveling this charge at their enemies, militia leaders can claim, sometimes with genuine conviction, to be “antifascist,” thereby effectively
468

preempting those on the left who themselves charge
that genuine fascists and antisemites are influential
within the militias. The website www.US-militia.org,
for instance, describes those states with stringent
gun laws as “despicable and fascist,” while also stating, “If you are a racist, NAZI, KKK, aryan national,
psycho or any other type of genetic freak; we do not
want you. We suggest you go see a psychiatrist or
other mental health professional.” Nevertheless,
despite this disclamation, the site contains a link to
the 7th Missouri Militia—the most openly racist
militia site, run by Martin Lindstedt.
In a similar vein, a pro-militia group, Jews for the
Preservation of Firearms Ownership, puts forward
an argument that gun control has “racist roots”
(because blacks in the South have historically been
denied the right to gun ownership) and that it is a
precursor to “genocide.” Therefore, by opposing
gun laws the militias argue that they are preventing
the likelihood of genocide being carried out in the
United States against any minority. Within this
framework gun owners are depicted as a victimized
group denied their civil rights in much the same
way as nonwhites historically have been denied
theirs (www.JPFO.org is one of the most widely
linked pro-gun sites from militia sites). This mirrors
the strategy of the Christian Right, who have since
the 1980s utilized the language of “civil rights” in
defense of Christian values, and have employed
conspiracy theories concerning “secular humanism”—portrayed as a rival religion to Christianity
(Jorstad).
Apart from “nationalism,” expressed as the desire
to “save America,” there is no guiding ideology behind a movement that generally denies being
“antigovernment” at all—militias are merely opposed
to “unconstitutional” government, their exponents
claim. Widespread agreement exists among militia
members only that there exists a plan to impose
global tyranny, usually referred to as the New World
Order. This is specifically a socialist plan for global
domination. Within this plan a central role is played
by the United Nations, which, it is claimed, will use
foreign troops to disarm the U.S. populace following
the enactment of stringent gun-control measures,
hence the importance not only of gun ownership, but

Militias

also of training and drilling in military techniques and
marksmanship.
The “precipitating factors” that spurred the
movement included the passage of the 1993 Brady
Bill, which regulated the sale of handguns and
restricted ownership to nonfelons; the outlawing of
“assault weapons” as part of the Omnibus Crime
Bill (1995), passed in the wake of the Oklahoma
City bombing; the passage of international trade
agreements such as the Global Agreement on
Trade and Tariffs (GATT) and North Amercan
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which politicians
such as Patrick Buchanan said were causing U.S.
jobs to be exported to the Third World; and two
events that indicated, from the Christian Patriot
perspective, that the federal government had
declared war on its people: the botched sieges by
federal agents at Ruby Ridge, Idaho, in 1992 and
then again, more cataclysmically, at Waco, Texas, in
1993. These events were interpreted as proof that
the New World Order was nearing completion. A
Texan militia commander said of Waco, “We were
sleep-walking through life. It was the massacre that
woke us all up. When the history of this age is written, that’ll be the shot that rang out around the
world and changed everything” (Evans-Pritchard).
Militia activists are widely characterized as sharing
a conspiracist outlook. Core beliefs include: that the
New World Order will require the use of concentration camps for Christian resisters; that unmarked
black helicopters are being used by the military in
preparation for their plans; that foreign troops working for the United Nations will be used to disarm
civilians and imprison them; that international road
signs are used in the United States in order to assist
these foreign troops; that urban street gangs (such as
the Bloods and Crips in Los Angeles) will be used as
“shock troops” for the New World Order; and that
implanted chips are being used to monitor U.S. citizens (a belief shared by Tim McVeigh). The following elite groups are identified as the instigators of the
conspiracy: the Skull and Bones secret society, based
at Yale University (of which the Bush family are said
to be members); the Council on Foreign Relations;
the Trilateral Commission (comprising economic,
political, and media elites from Western Europe,

North America, and Japan); the Bilderbergers; the
Rockefeller and Rothschild banking families; and
the British royal family. Many of these conspiracy
theories are the same as those of the John Birch
Society, who label these elites “the Insiders.” Although these elites include Americans, the conspiracy itself is specifically un-American, as pointed out
by Bo Gritz, speaking in 1992: “what we see are the
tentacles of this elite club. . . . I think the head, the
brain, the guts of this thing probably lies offshore
from the United States” (Ridgeway, 13–14).
This is a brief summary of some of the more common theories, which not all militia members will
believe. Another popular view is the suggestion that
UFOs have made contact with human governments
and they are colluding with corrupt elites, as advanced by William Cooper in Behold a Pale Horse, a
book that is both popular and influential in militia
circles (and which takes its title from a line in the
Book of Revelation 6: 8). Some conspiracy theories
are more mundane, relating to health issues such as
fluoride in water supplies, or the belief that high
school shootings are caused by giving the drug
Ritalin to children. It is belief in conspiracies that
informs all resistance from the far right, framed in
opposition to the left. Unanimity is not required,
merely the identification of common enemies—the
enemies of the nation.
Militia and Patriot publications and websites also
present an economic analysis, in which the Federal
Reserve is depicted as a corrupt body, backed by private banking interests, overseeing a monetary system based upon usury and fictitious capital. There is
a considerable crossover into the tax protest/resistance constituency of Patriots who believe that the
payment of income tax—which was introduced illegally in 1912, it is argued—is actually voluntary and
not a compulsory obligation. By refusing to cooperate with the Inland Revenue Service (IRS), Patriots
believe that they are striking a blow against the New
World Order. By declaring themselves “sovereign
citizens” many believe that they can legally evade
income tax, so long as they learn “common law” well
enough to refute the erroneous arguments of IRS
officials in court. Predictably, run-ins with the IRS
have resulted in many would-be Patriots becoming
469

Militias

incarcerated or fined, as their common law arguments have failed to win out in court. Thus “tax
resisters” frequently become available for recruitment to the far right, as was the case with Robert
Mathews of The Order, for instance (Flynn and
Gerhardt, 55).
In militia publications and websites, comparisons
are commonly made with the situation when America was a British colony, ruled by King George III,
which resulted in the American Revolution and the
overthrow of colonial rule. This comparison legitimizes resistance against corrupt federal authority,
summed up in the oft-repeated quote from Ben
Franklin, “They that would give up essential liberty
for a little temporary safety deserve neither liberty
nor safety.” The vast majority of militia websites and
publications, it should be emphasized, express only
the utmost loyalty to the U.S. Constitution, which
they feel is under threat from traitorous enemies,
and they disavow both racism and violence.
It is apparent that the militias’ typical stance,
being one of rebellion and distrust of mainstream
politics and culture, leads many to come into conflict
with law enforcement agencies, and the Militia
Watchdog website provides a lengthy litany of militia
members and leaders who have been arrested and
charged with crimes ranging from firearms offenses,
tax evasion, and civil disobedience (such as driving
without a valid driver’s license), to more serious ones
such as conspiracy to blow up federal buildings. In
some cases, such as that of the Arizona Viper Militia,
the leading protagonists in a conspiracy to make
bombs turned out to be undercover federal agents
(eleven out of the twelve who were arrested in 1996
eventually received prison sentences).
Rise and Fall of the Militias
Calls for the formation of citizens’ militias were
voiced as early as the 1980s by various right-wing
groupings, including Christian Reconstructionists
such as Larry Pratt, who is described by one commentator as the “Little noticed . . . chief theoretician
of the militia movement” (Clarkson, 103). The modern “neomilitia” movement began in 1994 (the Militia of Montana was officially started in January of
that year) and reached its zenith around 1996, when
470

an estimated 858 Patriot groups were in existence,
of which 370 were identified as militias (SPLC). By
1998 the number of militias had declined to 171 and
in 1999 the figure stabilized at just below 200, which
held up through the year 2000, according to watchdogs. The Internet is the principal propaganda
medium and meeting forum for the militias—the
number of militia websites reached 263 in 2000, but
fell to 155 by early 2001, a drop of 41 percent. Nevertheless, the diversification of tactics into “common
law” and “sovereign citizen” tax protests, “paper terrorism” (illegal property liens and “freemen” court
judgments against local opponents, for example),
and well-publicized standoffs against law enforcement agencies suggested that the movement is likely
to be far from moribund for the early years of the
new millennium.
The majority of the literature on the militias
emphasizes the rural base of the movement, especially the farming heartland of the West and Midwest allied with “nativist” forces in the South (Stern;
McNicol Stock). Mark Fenster describes the militia
movement as a “‘grassroots’ far-right movement
emanating from the middle of the country” (22).
There are other writers, however, who argue that it
has grown beyond this base and that “militia seem to
be where people are, all over the country, not just in
Montana” (Castells, 95). Clearly, the movement is
strongest in rural areas and much of its rhetoric lionizes the rural backbone of the United States. In
many ways it is part of the ongoing rural-versus-city
struggle for power and influence in politics, in which
people from any geographical region can, through
the power of the Internet, buy into the rural mythology and the associated “traditional values,” against
the liberal permissiveness, corruption, and moral
decadence of the cities. But it is not restricted only
to rural areas and has appeal for those in metropolitan areas for whom the police state is felt to be an
oppressive force.
In May 1999 Norm Olson of the Northern Michigan Regional Militia “recalled” militias for a meeting
at Fort Wolverine, Michigan, in order to prepare a
response to the expected declaration of martial law,
which, it was assumed, would follow the predicted
crisis brought about by widespread computer failure

Militias

at the start of the new millennium (known as the Y2K
bug). Following the Oklahoma City bombing of April
1995 many militias had dispersed or gone underground, following adverse publicity; as Olson saw it,
the militias had been “demonized” by federal authorities working through the media. (For militia members the media and the entertainment industries are
deeply implicated in the New World Order conspiracy.) The evidence suggests, however, that militia
ranks actually swelled in the aftermath of the Oklahoma bombing (according to “watchdog” figures,
that is).
Reading alarmist reports of coming chaos at the
dawn of the new millennium, which also fitted with
some Christian fundamentalist prophetic timetables, militia leaders such as Olson believed that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
planned to use it as an opportunity to take control
in the United States, and that militias had to be prepared to resist the roundup of Patriots that this
would entail. Olson also felt that since Oklahoma

the movement had lost “momentum” and “vision,”
and the recall was designed to address this: “In a
way that’s what’s happened to America. We’ve lost
our vision. And during the last six months there has
been a tremendous concern growing about Y2K,
our involvement in the Balkans and rumblings of
martial law.” He also alleged that detention centers
were being set up, a common theme in Patriot publications such as the Spotlight. “Martial law will not
succeed in Northern Michigan,” Olson continued.
“We will fight against it if it’s imposed” (Michels).
The Y2K bug failed to cause economic collapse,
civil unrest was not a problem, and martial law was
never imposed. The militias declined during 2000
and with the eventual victory of George W. Bush in
the presidential election of that year many militias
have either disappeared or sought to take refuge on
the Internet, maintaining websites and mailing lists.
They retain a strong presence in cyberspace, the
Michigan Militia and the Militia of Montana being
the best-known examples.

Two members of the Michigan Militia, a U.S. paramilitary group. (Cynthia Howe/Corbis Sygma)

471

Militias

Impact of September 11
Prior to the terrorist attacks of 11 September Mark
Pitcavage believed that the militia movement “has
certainly declined, but it is not in danger of disappearing, and in fact in many parts of the country it is
still very strong. In some parts of the country, where
militia arrests laid it low (such as West Virginia and
Georgia), it is reforming.” He also mentioned the
“reflowering” of the tax protest movement and the
growth in popularity of the “redemption” tactic of
common law adherents (a type of financial scam),
“active in virtually every single state” (private email,
May 2001). Militias were also able to mobilize supporters for lengthy standoffs with law enforcement
agencies in both Indiana and Texas during 2000–
2001, at the Indianapolis Baptist Church and the Joel
Grey farm, respectively. Taking the “antigovernment
movement” as a whole, of which the militias are but
a part, Pitcavage concluded that it “has existed in
more or less its present form since the early 1970s
and nobody’s managed to stamp it out yet. I doubt it
is dead right now.”
However, since 11 September the militias have
been somewhat eclipsed by the wave of patriotism
that has swept the United States, coupled with the
strong support for President Bush and the federal
government’s “war on terrorism.” Militia websites
have adapted their rhetoric, arguing that terrorism
stands alongside socialism, liberalism, and communism as threats to U.S. values and prosperity. The lesson for the gun lobby—the center of gravity for the
militias—was that the plane hijackings could have
been avoided if air passengers were allowed to carry
guns on board flights: “only self defense by the ‘unorganized militia’ will be available when domestic or
foreign terrorists choose their next moment of murder. And here is the public-policy implication of this
fact: It would be better if the militia were more prepared to act when it is needed” (Barnett). The passengers who fought against the hijackers on Flight
93, which came down in rural Pennsylvania, it is
argued, were effectively acting as a citizens’ militia.
Individualized security—the right of the citizen to
bear arms and form militias—is held as the ideal,
contrasted with any notion of collectivized security

472

arrangements carried out by the state in conjunction
with the disarming of civilians, which remains anathema to the Right in the United States.
It is clear, however, that militia appeals have lost a
degree of salience as a result of 11 September, as
there is again an external enemy taking on a similar
role to that of international communism during the
cold war. As Norm Olson put it, “I don’t want anyone
to have the idea that we’re going to bow down to the
federal government, but I think this could be a new
beginning. . . . As long as there is a foreign enemy,
we will work together with our federal government.
George Bush’s enemy is my enemy” (Barry). Nevertheless, given the nature of conspiracist thinking, it is
clear that many will be resistant to appeals to support
the federal government, and will regard 11 September as a planned event, part of the conspiracy—as
does the Freedom Fighter Net, linked from the
Michigan Militia site: “As Franklin Delano Roosevelt is quoted as saying: ‘Nothing ever happens in
international politics that isn’t planned.’ Our leaders
may not have a clue what is actually going on here,
but these attacks have New World Order and One
World Government written all over them.”
Hidden Agendas?
The pro-militia publication the Patriot Report (run
by Christian Identity adherent George Eaton, out
of Arkansas) argued that the militias formed in the
1990s as a defensive response to “when the socialist
change agents began making offensive moves
against the U.S. Constitution and American sovereignty. . . . the only thing standing in the conspirators’ way of total world conquest,” he continued,
“was the few American patriots who still believe in
the constitutional American Republic. . . . It was
aggressive and offensive moves by the conspirators
for a One World Government that caused the
patriot community to recognize tyranny and then to
form militias. . . . The militias are defensive, not
offensive or revolutionary” (Eaton, 4).
Nevertheless, “watchdog” organizations, such as
the ADL and the Southern Poverty Law Center
(SPLC), and some activists argue that the militias
harbor hidden agendas and that racists and anti-

Militias

semites have played influential roles in the formation of the militia movement. They further argue
that the “Patriots” who make up the bulk of the
membership constituted “the seedbed, if not the
realization, of a uniquely American kind of fascism”
(Neiwert, 320). Morris Dees (of Klanwatch—part
of the SPLC that Dees heads) describes John
Trochmann, founder of the Militia of Montana, as
“a frequent visitor to the neo-Nazi Aryan Nations,”
apparently indicating guilt by association. In Dees’s
book Gathering Storm: America’s Militia Threat, he
links the militias directly with Tim McVeigh (the
Oklahoma City bomber), suggesting that the movement “led to the most destructive act of domestic
terrorism” in U.S. history up until that point. Dees
stated in a letter to the then U.S. attorney general,
Janet Reno: “Our office has confirmed the active
involvement of a number of well-known white
supremacists, Posse Comitatus, Christian Identity,
and other extremist leaders and groups in the growing militia movement” (Mulloy, 145). These
included established far-right leaders such as Louis
Beam (ex–Ku Klux Klan Grand Dragon), Bo Gritz
(“a notorious antisemite”), and James Wickstrom (a
Posse Comitatus leader).
In making the case for the involvement of farright activists, Dees is not alone in ascribing a meeting that took place in October 1992 at Estes Park,
Colorado, as a sort of planning meeting for the formation of the militias (see also Abanes, 180;
McLemee, 19; Stern, 35; Ridgeway, 16). Known as
the “Rocky Mountain Rendezvous,” it brought together over 150 far-right leaders, including Richard
Butler of Aryan Nations, Red Beckman of the Fully
Informed Jury Association, and Larry Pratt, founder
of Gun Owners of America, who represented the
militant wing of the pro-gun lobby. The event, which
was organized by Pete Peters largely in response to
the Ruby Ridge siege that had taken place earlier in
the year, featured a keynote speech by Louis Beam
in which he outlined the “leaderless resistance”
strategy, based upon cellular, decentralized structures apparently similar to those employed by the
“Committees of Correspondence” during the American Revolution. In the article of the same name that

explains “Leaderless Resistance,” originally written
in 1983, Beam advocates various ways in which
“those who love our race, culture, and heritage” can
resist “federal tyranny,” which he regards as having
replaced the threat of communism in the United
States. Strategies include utilizing “camouflage,” by
which Beam means “the ability to blend in the public’s eye the more committed groups of resistance
with mainstream ‘kosher’ associations that are generally seen as harmless.” In other words, racists
should involve themselves in groups through being
disingenuous about their true ideology. With this in
mind, it is clear that it would be impossible to prove
that racists and antisemites are dominant within the
militias, but at the same time it is a fair assumption
that there are at least some present.
Nevertheless, the role of racists should not be
overstated. Mark Pitcavage believes that Estes Park
was not particularly relevant to the development of
the militia movement and that “most militia leaders
never even heard of it.” Representatives of both the
SPLC and ADL are agreed that the militia movement is not mainly characterized by racism. Martin
Durham argues, “Rather than see Estes Park as the
origin of the modern militias it would seem more
useful to see it as one of many Patriot initiatives that
anticipated, but only in some cases influenced, the
emergence of a new wave of paramilitary groups in
1994” (Durham, 76). He concludes that far more
emphasis should be given to the role of the militant
pro-gun lobby, including the National Rifle Association, but more significantly a rival group, the Gun
Owners of America (headed by Larry Pratt).
For some, it is the belief in conspiracy theories
that is regarded as proof enough that the militias
harbor racist sentiments: “This current crop of conspiracy theories is written on a template forged long
ago and reshaped by successive tales of secret worldwide conspiracies” (Ridgeway, 13). The argument is
that the above theories can be traced back to antisemitic conspiracy theories, based on the model of
Protocols of the Elders of Zion, a forged account of
Jewish plans for global domination. But this is to
overlook the overwhelming religiosity of the movement. Other commentators have drawn attention to

473

Militias

what they see as the leading role of Christian “reconstructionists” and antiabortion radicals (often with
links to white-supremacist theologies). But there is
far more consensus that it was Pat Robertson’s 1991
bestseller, The New World Order, that did most to
pave the way for the militias. It both popularized and
brought together secular and religious conspiracy
theories in a single overarching analysis that labeled
the conspirators as motivated by absolute evil
(McLemee). Robertson specifically rules out blaming “monopoly capitalism” for the problems of the
world—there is “some other power at work.” He
identifies the “policy elites” who are attempting to
dominate the world and concludes that such
impulses spring “from the depth of something that is
evil, neither well intentioned nor benevolent”
(Robertson, 9). There is no overt racism or antisemitism in the book, however, although Robertson
took considerable flak for his decision to utilize antisemitic sources—he included references to both
Eustace Mullins and Nesta Webster, for example.
Rather than demonizing the militias as racist conspiracies guided by antisemitism, Mark Fenster
argues that they are better understood if the important modern role of “popular eschatology” is
emphasized: that is, the practice of reading and
interpreting both history and contemporary events
as the signs foretold in the Bible, mediated to a
mass market of Christians (hence popular eschatology). The Book of Revelation is particularly significant, speaking of “fire and smoke and brimstone”;
the number of the Beast (666); the four horsemen
of the Apocalypse; the violent destruction of Babylon and the slaying of a third of the human population; the hour of judgment; Armageddon; and so on.
Rather than preparing for a race war, Fenster feels
that militia members are more likely to be preparing to fight it out with the Antichrist, assisting the
forces of Christ in the final showdown at Armageddon. Popular eschatology is based upon a “mechanistic theory of power . . . [which] echoes, and at
times explicitly borrows, the theories of more secular right-wing conspiracy theories,” but they are not
the same thing. Although the lines between religious and secular conspiracy theories are blurred,
“they each emerge from distinct, if at times over474

lapping, social and cultural contexts” (Fenster, 147).
It is, therefore, the difference between conservative
Protestantism on the one hand, and modernist/liberal Protestantism on the other, that holds the key
to understanding popular eschatology, which is
deeply traditionalist and pious. The militias represent the backlash politics of conservative Protestantism, reacting against the domination of “secular
humanism” and the (immoral) liberal consensus
that prevails in contemporary America.
There are concerns that militias function as
“bridges,” facilitating the movement of Christian
conservatives toward the far right, as they encounter
the secular conspiracy theories of the Christian Right
and the John Birch Society, whose tracts are widely
available on militia sites, and then become susceptible to the more dangerous extremism of antisemites,
whose sites are far less frequently linked (Barkun).
Similarly, Ken Stern (107) uses the notion of “funnels” to describe the way that the movement takes
people in over concerns over a wide range of issues,
such as gun control and environmental restrictions,
and then when they get to the extremist core of the
funnel they emerge as antisemites, as did Tim
McVeigh.
Militias also represent very real economic interests, such as gun manufacturers who use patriotism
to boost sales and who promote gun ownership as
the antidote to individual insecurity; anti-environmentalists who support the rights of loggers and
mining interests over the efforts by Greens to
restrict the use of natural resources and to protect
wildernesses; and free market libertarians whose
main concern is with maintaining a vibrant culture of
antitax militancy and antigovernmentalism. These
diverse interests express no support for racism or
antisemitism, but because they employ the myths of
nationalism and have a dialectical relationship with
the same caricatured versions of their ideological
enemies—liberalism and socialism—then they also
have to contend with the racists in their midst who
regard the nation as an ethnically based entity
(belonging to white Europeans) rather than a valuesbased one (of which all immigrants can become a
part). As far as militias are concerned, it is the political Left that has the hidden agenda (the eventual

Militias

creation of communism), which will result in the
enslavement of all nations. The militias are ideologically “slippery,” and therefore able to recruit beyond
the traditional “Christian Patriot” base of support,
precisely because they have no need to be open and
unambiguous about what they really believe in. They
represent symbolic resistance to globalization, multiculturalism, and state power, often reflecting cultural
chauvinism, but for every racist militia there is at
least one libertarian one. They are a cause for concern for law enforcement agencies because, as Mark
Pitcavage puts it, “they have the tools for violence
coupled with an ideology in which violence is not
only permissible but if used for the right ends,
admirable.” By refusing to specify what the ultimate
ends might be they are hoping to move beyond the
fringes and into the mainstream.
Nigel James
See also: Apocalypticism; Income Tax and the
Internal Revenue Service; Ruby Ridge; Waco.
References
Abanes, Richard. 1996. American Militias: Rebellion,
Racism & Religion. Illinois: InterVarsity Press.
Anti-Defamation League of B’nai B’rith. 1994.
Armed and Dangerous: Militias Take Aim at the
Federal Government. New York: ADL.
———. 1995a. Special Report: Paranoia as
Patriotism: Far Right Influences on the Militia
Movement. New York: ADL.
———. 1995b. Beyond the Bombing: The Militia
Menace Grows. An Update of Armed and
Dangerous. New York: ADL.
Barkun, Michael. 1996. “Religion, Militias and
Oklahoma City: The Mind of Conspiratorialists,”
Terrorism and Political Violence 8 (1): 50–64.
Barnett, Randy E. 2001. “Saved by the Militia:
Arming an Army against Terrorism.” National
Review Online, 18 September.
Barry, Ellen. 2001. “Taking Arms: Militias Turn
Fight Away from US, at Its Enemies.” Boston
Globe, 22 September.
Beam, Louis. 1983. “Leaderless Resistance,” http://
www2.mo-net.com/~mlindste/ledrless.html.
Berlet, Chip, and Matthew Lyons. 2000. Right-Wing
Populism in America: Too Close for Comfort. New
York: Guilford Press.
Castells, Manuel. 1999. The Information Age:
Economy, Society and Culture. Vol. 2, The Power
of Identity. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.

Clarkson, Frederick. 1997. Eternal Hostility: The
Struggle between Theocracy and Democracy.
Monroe, MA: Common Courage Press.
Congressional Research Service Report for
Congress. 1995. The Unauthorized Militia
Movement in the United States: Current Status,
Historical Context. Washington, DC.
Dees, Morris, and James Corcoran. 1997. Gathering
Storm: America’s Militia Threat. New York:
Harper Perennial.
Durham, Martin. 2000. The Christian Right, the Far
Right and the Boundaries of American
Conservatism. Manchester: Manchester
University Press.
Eaton, G. 1997. “Militias Are Alive and Going
Strong.” Patriot Report, February.
Evans-Pritchard, Ambrose. 1994. “British
Newspaper Publishes Truth about Citizens
Militias.” Spotlight, 26 December. Originally
published in Sunday Telegraph (London), 4
December.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. 1999. Special
Report: Project Megiddo. http://www.fbi.gov/
library/megiddo/. Also available at: http://www.
constitution.org/y2k/megiddo.htm.
Fenster, Mark. 1999. Conspiracy Theories: Secrecy
and Power in American Culture. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Flynn, Kevin, and Gary Gerhardt. 1989. The Silent
Brotherhood. New York: Penguin.
Jorstad, Erling. 1987. The New Christian Right
1981–88: Prospects for the Post-Reagan Decade.
New York: Edwin Mellen Press.
Kelly, Michael. 1995. “The Road to Paranoia.” New
Yorker, June, 60–75.
McLemee, Scott. 1995. “Public Enemy.” These
Times, 15 May.
McNicol Stock, Catherine. 1996. Rural Radicals:
From Bacon’s Rebellion to the Oklahoma City
Bombing. New York: Penguin.
Michels, Frank. 1999. “Militia Recall and
Countdown to Y2K, Civil Unrest.” Gaylord
Herald Times, 15 May.
Mulloy, Darren. 1999. Homegrown Revolutionaries:
An American Militia Reader. Norwich, England:
EAS Publishing.
Neiwert, David A. 1999. In God’s Country: The
Patriot Movement and the Pacific Northwest.
Pullman: Washington State University.
Pitcavage, Mark. 1995. Militia—History and Law
FAQ: Part 6—Afterword. http://www.adl.org/
mwd/faq6.htm.

475

Millerarianism

———. 2001. Personal email, May (confirmed for
attribution January 2002).
Puckett, Gary. 1999. “Why I WILL NOT Obey
California’s Gun Registration Edict.”
http://web2.airmail.net/reptex1/guntruth.htm.
Ridgeway, James. 1995. Blood in the Face: The Ku
Klux Klan, Aryan Nations, Nazi Skinheads, and
the Rise of a New White Culture. New York:
Thunder’s Mouth Press.
Robertson, Pat. 1991. The New World Order. Dallas,
TX: Word Publishing.
Roland, Jon. 2000. “Commentary on the FBI.
Project Megiddo.” http://www.constitution.org/
y2k/megid_jr.htm.
Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC). 1997.
Intelligence Report. Spring, no. 86.
Stern, Kenneth S. 1996. A Force upon the Plain: The
American Militia Movement and the Politics of
Hate. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Suprynowicz, Vin. 1993. “A Nation of Cowards.” The
Public Interest, Fall. Also in Suprynowicz, V.
1999. Send in the Waco Killers: Essays on the
Freedom Movement, 1993–1998. Las Vegas, NV:
Mountain Media.
Websites
Constitution Society: http://www.constitution.org.
Freedom Fighter Net:
http://www.mindspring.com/~frdmftr/index.htm.
Michigan Militia: http://www.montana.com/
militiaofmontana. /
Militia of Montana: http://www.militiaofmontana.
com/.
Militia Watchdog: http://militia-watchdog.org.
US Militia: www.US-militia.org.

Millenarianism
Millenarianism in the United States has often been
associated with a conspiratorial outlook. Narrowly
defined, millenarianism is the belief in the thousandyear reign of the Messiah forecast by the Hebrew
prophets in the Hebrew Scriptures, or Christian Old
Testament. The millennial rule of Jesus Christ, believed by Christians to be the Messiah, is also mentioned in the Book of Revelation in the New Testament. More recently, the application of the term
“millenarianism” has been expanded to include a
variety of other groups who seek to establish, or if in
the future to forecast and promote, an ideal or
utopian community. These include some Eastern
476

and Near Eastern religious movements, such as the
Aum Shinrikyo, a derivative of Japanese Buddhism,
and apocalyptic sects within Islam. The term has also
been applied to certain secular political movements,
such as National Socialism and communism, but
within the United States most millenarians have traditionally been Christians, and they often subscribe
to a host of conspiracy theories.
Christian Millenarianism in
American History
As early as the colonial era, Puritans in the Massachusetts Bay Colony interpreted the perceived spiritual apathy, or “declension,” within their envisioned millennial community as the result of dark,
unseen forces, a perspective exemplified by the
notorious Salem Witch Trials in the seventeenth
century. Colonial religious leaders such as Cotton
Mather and the revivalist Jonathan Edwards saw
world events as marching toward the establishment
of the Kingdom of God. In particular, Mather, who
viewed the pope as the Antichrist in league with the
French armies in Canada, saw the commencement
of the French and Indian War in 1754 as an event
of apocalyptic proportions. During the years leading up to and including the American Revolution,
many colonists saw the British, and King George III
in particular, as emissaries of the devil, and they
interpreted British actions as part of a great conspiracy that would fulfill the prophecies of the Book
of Revelation.
Millenarian belief thrived in the early republic
and throughout the nineteenth century, and it
seemed to increase after the political and social turmoil of the Civil War. During the 1840s, the revivalist William Miller and his supporters eagerly awaited
Christ’s return to establish a millennial kingdom,
only to have their hopes crushed when their expectations failed. Yet the widely publicized Millerite
debacle failed to dissuade further converts to millenarianism. In fact, the intellectual pedigree of
many contemporary Christian millenarians is rooted
in the work of John Nelson Darby, a nineteenthcentury Irish minister who developed a prophetic
outline for interpreting events prior to the Second
Coming of Christ. Darby’s prophetic theories, which

Millenarianism

began to be widely circulated in the United States in
the 1870s, became known as “premillennial dispensationalism.” Darby’s interpretations were later further popularized by Cyrus Scofield in his Scofield
Reference Bible. This work, which was first published in 1909, continues to be influential at the
beginning of the twenty-first century. Central to
Darby’s scenario was the belief in the literal
thousand-year reign of Christ on the earth, an event
that would be presaged by an escalating moral
decline around the world. Both Darby and Scofield
also emphasized such End Time events as the
release of Jerusalem from Gentile control, an event
that Scofield suggested had been fulfilled with the
British capture of the city in 1917, and the eventual
rise of an evil representative of the devil, the
Antichrist, who would terrorize the world in the days
before Christ’s return.
Christian millenarians who support this interpretation that social, political, economic, and cultural
conditions in the world will worsen before the Second Coming of Christ are generally classified as
“premillenarian.” They maintain that Jesus will
intervene in world affairs and establish the millennial reign. Conversely, millenarians who believe
that Jesus Christ does not have to return for the millennium to begin, or that humanity is capable of
bringing it about through social and political
reform, are known as “postmillenarian.”
Premillenarianism and Conspiracy Theory
Conspiracy theories are generally found among
advocates of premillenarian beliefs. Some premillennialists are what certain scholars have termed
“apocalyptic millenarians” and/or “revolutionary
millenarians.” Apocalyptic millenarians believe that
the millennium is imminent and that they will play
an active role in bringing it about. Revolutionary
millenarians are currently actively involved in overturning the structures of society in an attempt to
bring the millennium to fruition. Many apocalyptic
millenarians, and most revolutionary millenarians,
promote conspiracy theories. These often include
belief in a New World Order, the view that the
United States government is bent on removing individual freedoms, a belief in the sinister dimensions

of modern technology such as computers or credit
cards, or an interpretation that considers the
planned economic and possible political unification
of Europe dangerous.
These conspiracy theories are often well publicized. For instance, when former United States
President George Bush proclaimed a New World
Order in the post–cold war world, many conservative evangelical Christians interpreted his words as a
fulfillment of biblical prophecy. These included Pat
Robertson, the primary host of the 700 Club, a television program popular in conservative Christian circles. Robertson is the son of a former United States
senator, and was himself a candidate for the Republican presidential nomination in 1988. In his book
The New World Order, Robertson suggested that a
conspiratorial New World Order was a concerted
plan by specific groups and organizations, including
the United Nations, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the Federal Reserve
Board, to establish a one-world government.
Robertson attributed many of these machinations to
a supposed “invisible hand” that engineered U.S.
domestic and foreign policies. Robertson left little
doubt about the supposed wicked nature of these
plans and warned Christians to be both aware and
wary.
Robertson’s high-profile status notwithstanding,
the most recognized distributor of Christian millenarianism in the last few decades has been Hal
Lindsey, the author of a number of books, most
notably The Late Great Planet Earth (1970), which
was the best-selling nonfiction work of the 1970s.
Only sales of the Bible outdistanced Lindsey’s sensational account of End Time prophecy, which was
reissued in subsequent editions. Lindsey emphasized the rise of a European dictator who would
dominate the world before the return of Christ. In
developing his assertions, Lindsey relied heavily
upon the formulations earlier devised by both Darby
and Scofield.
Recently, however, Tim LaHaye and Jerry Jenkins have popularized millenarian conspiracy theories in their best-selling Left Behind series. LaHaye
and Jenkins outline a fictional scenario for End
Time events, supposedly based on prophecies in the
477

Millerites

Book of Revelation, in which a conspiratorial worldruling dictator, a villain capable of enormous evil,
wages war on all true Christians and seeks to exterminate them from the earth. The consistent popularity of the volumes in this series—these books
have regularly been on the New York Times bestseller list—underscores the degree to which millenarian belief and its attendant conspiratorial fascination have invaded popular culture.
The Future of Millenarian Belief
It is unlikely that millenarian belief, and the conspiracy theories that arise from it, will recede.
Although specific millenarian interpretations, such
as the view of William Miller and his followers that
Christ would return in 1843, can be disproved, the
millenarian model for understanding the world cannot be so easily undermined. Millenarian beliefs are
persistent and can be made to rhetorically fit almost
any social and cultural context. Contemporary
advocates of millenarianism, premillenarians in particular, are unlikely to be convinced that their portrayal of the conspiratorial nature of current events
is inaccurate. In fact, the belief that one is instrumental in bringing the millennium to fruition, or at
least that one is witnessing or about to witness the
cataclysmic events that will lead to the end of the
world, is seductive. Millenarians are often drawn
into a fantasy realm to which their lives seem integral. Although critics may argue that such belief is
delusional, advocates of millenarianism are likely to
experience a psychological sense of relief, and even
a sense of eager anticipation, occasioned by their
view that the course of world events is predetermined and that political, social, and cultural change
is imminent. They will hence remain on the lookout
for “signs” of the end, signs that are often found in
the dark corners of U.S. conspiracy theories.
Michael Scott Lupo
See also: Apocalypticism; Lindsey, Hal; Millerites;
New World Order; One-World Government;
Seventh Day Adventists; Waco.
References
Boyer, Paul. 1992. When Time Shall Be No More:
Prophecy Belief in Modern American Culture.

478

Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press.
Goldberg, Robert Alan. 2001. Enemies Within: The
Culture of Conspiracy in Modern America. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Kaplan, Jeffrey. 1997. Radical Religion in America:
Millenarian Movements from the Far Right to the
Children of Noah. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse
University Press.
O’Leary, Stephen. 1994. Arguing the Apocalypse: A
Theory of Millennial Rhetoric. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Wojcik, Daniel. 1997. The End of the World As We
Know It: Faith, Fatalism, and Apocalypse in
America. New York: New York University Press.

Millerites
Emerging during the Second Great Awakening, the
Millerites were followers of the millenarian teachings of a self-made preacher named William Miller
(1782–1849). Miller, who was born in Pittsfield,
Massachusetts, was an unlikely candidate to lead a
large religious movement. Miller, a deist for a time,
had experiences in the War of 1812 that led him to a
more active religious life. After moving to Low
Hampton, New York, and attending a Baptist
church, he took a strong interest in the Second Coming of Christ. Miller studied the Bible and constructed a timeline for what he believed were the
rapidly approaching “End Times.” Hesitantly, he
stated that end would come sometime between 21
March 1843 and 21 March 1844. His writings were
detailed and meticulous, focusing on the Book of
Daniel and the Book of Revelation. After many years
of failing to convince ministers and preachers of the
accuracy of his predictions, Miller reluctantly took to
preaching himself in 1833. In 1838 he gained a
highly skilled and valuable follower named Joshua V.
Himes. A hardworking abolitionist, Himes helped to
manage Miller’s affairs and published several Adventist newspapers such as the Midnight Cry and Signs
of the Times, which proclaimed Miller’s message.
The papers sought to link current events to Miller’s
timeline while warning the public about the coming
apocalypse. Only with the help of Himes did Millerism attract a large following.

Millerites

A playful caricature of a Millerite, an adherent of the Adventist preacher William Miller, who predicted that the world
would end on 23 April 1844. The man sits in a large safe labeled “Patent Fire Proof Chest,” stocked with a ham, a fan
(hanging on the door of the safe), cheese, brandy, cigars, ice, a hat, and a small book marked “Miller.” As he thumbs his
nose, he says, “Now let it come! I’m ready.” The “salamander safe,” probably a trade name of the period, is named after
the animal mythically reputed to have the ability to endure fire (and, presumably, the holocaust) without harm. (Library
of Congress)

The Millerites, although often assumed to be
from the poor and lower classes, actually came from
all classes, tended to be from a rural background,
and had a variety of professions and religious affiliations. Miller encouraged his followers to remain
with their denominations for most of his career.
Unlike previous millenarians, the Millerites had no

real political agenda, and they focused entirely on
the imminent Second Coming of Christ. It is unclear
exactly how many Millerites there were, but some
estimates place the figure at 50,000 committed followers with many thousands more cautiously interested and lukewarm followers (Barkun, 33). One of
Miller and Himes’s most successful methods for

479

Mind Control

recruiting followers was their use of the traveling
“Great Tent” for revival meetings. As the movement
grew, other meetings began to occur on a regular
basis throughout the northeastern United States,
and especially in New York State’s “Burned-Over
District” (so named for the repeated waves of religious revival which “burned over” the area). As 1843
approached the movement became more cohesive
and suffered more critical scrutiny at the hands of
the press. Horace Greeley’s Tribune spent an entire
issue attacking Millerism. The competency and
motivations of the movement’s leaders were questioned. Some of the more radical elements within
the Millerites responded by declaring their opponents to be Antichrists and calling for separation
from existing churches and denominations.
As the “final year” came and passed, the Millerites
felt a deep sense of disappointment and uncertainty.
William Miller sent out a message to his followers
declaring that he had been mistaken about the date,
but he still felt that the end of time was approaching
rapidly. While Miller and Himes continued preaching, another Millerite minister, Samuel Snow, set a
new date for the Second Coming. Snow stated that
Christ would return on the Hebrew Day of Atonement—22 October 1844. Although Miller was reluctant to select another date for the return of Christ,
he was pressured into acknowledging Snow’s date as
a possibility. There was soon more anticipation for
the new prediction than there had been for the previous one. Popular images and writings have portrayed the Millerites as dressing in white robes and
climbing to hilltops and rooftops on 22 October
1844, although this has never been verified. The failure of Snow’s prediction, now known as the Great
Disappointment, brought a new wave of criticism
from the press and charges of dishonesty. Many
urban intellectuals viewed Millerism as a form of
insanity. Amariah Bringham, head of Utica State
Lunatic Asylum, stated that even though most Millerites were normal, their teachings were a threat to
mental health and to future generations (Numbers
and Butler, 97–98). Only about 170 Millerites were
institutionalized in the United States, but the numbers didn’t prevent Millerism from becoming the
stereotype for religious mania and delusions.
480

Miller and Himes never again advocated an exact
date for the Second Coming. They instructed their
followers to live as if every day could be the end.
The movement soon broke into groups and factions, with the most prominent being the Seventh
Day Adventists.
Thomas White
See also: Apocalypticism; Millenarianism.
References
Barkun, Michael. 1986. Crucible of the Millennium:
The Burned Over District of New York in the
1840s. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.
Dick, Everett N. 1994. William Miller and the
Advent Crisis. Berrien Springs, MI: Andrews
University Press.
Numbers, Ronald L., and Jonathan M. Butler. 1993.
The Disappointed: Millerism and Millenarianism
in the Nineteenth Century. Knoxville: University
of Tennessee Press.

Mind Control
Although paranoia has usually been seen as the most
important aspect of conspiracy theory in terms of
subjectivity and psychology, mind-control conspiracies contribute in significant and complex ways to
fears around the control of the individual at the
hands of a hostile government or conspiracy group.
All conspiracy theories are based on a notion of
mind control anyway, simply because they are based
on a belief that a conspiracy is attempting to control
people’s beliefs and actions. The term “sheeple,”
used derogatorily by conspiracy theorists to describe
those who believe official government (dis)information, implies aspects of propaganda, brainwashing,
and control of people’s thoughts. Such a term is
based on a binary opposition of “us” and “them” that
dominates paranoid discourses of conspiracy where
there is, on the one hand, an elite group that is on
the inside of power and who have true knowledge of
how reality functions while, on the other, there is the
“mass” who are on the outside of power and who
only have access to reality through the lies and disinformation disseminated by the elite.
Mind control conspiracies have this structure at
their base, but problematize the notion of “inside”
and “outside.” The paranoid individual in conspir-

Mind Control

acy theory is relatively free from the control of the
conspiracy (because s/he “recognizes” its existence
and is therefore able to detach him- or herself from
it), creating an objective and meaningful individuality in opposition to the brainwashed “sheeple.”
Mind-control conspiracies have a more complex
position with regard to the notion of identity and
the construction of the conspiracy that controls its
victims, because the mind-control subject has an
ambiguous status as to whether s/he is inside or outside the conspiracy. On the one hand, they are
“inside” because they are doing the work of the conspiracy group as a result of their conditioning, programming, or physical implant, but on the other
hand, they are “outside” because they are doing so
unwittingly as part of a conspiracy where they are a
key element, but have no control over their actions.
Hence, many important conspiracy figures, such as
Lee Harvey Oswald, Sirhan Sirhan, and Timothy
McVeigh are presented in conspiracy theory in radically different ways, either as knowing participants
within a larger conspiracy or as mind-controlled
“patsies” who were used without their own knowledge. Mind control is therefore not easily understood as a conspiracy itself, because it does not have
a recognizable goal other than to ease the way for a
larger conspiracy group. As such, it is more a “sign”
that a conspiracy is at work in society, although in
the works of Jim Keith, a seminal mind-control conspiracist, it has been imagined as the key form of
social control for groups such as the Nazis and the
New World Order.
Anxieties and Concerns of Mind Control
The problematic nature of mind control, not least in
the question of whether it actually exists as a real
practice or as a meaningful psychological condition,
despite the documented evidence of the CIA’s MKULTRA program, leads to many issues that not only
focus around identity but also around the body,
reality, and knowledge. Mind-control conspiracies
can be understood in terms of six key anxieties or
cultural concerns:
• The death of the self
• The death of reality

• The “soulless” body
• The death of the human
• Technophobia
• The end of “knowledge”
The death of the self revolves around the question of
whether mind-control subjects (should such people
exist) act according to their own desire or whether
they are tools in someone else’s hands. The opposition can be seen in terms of a split between the conscious self-willed individual and the unconsciously
driven puppet. However, because conspiracy does
not control the subject from outside, but from
within his or her consciousness (either through hypnosis, brainwashing and behavioral modification,
drugs, or implants), such an opposition becomes
problematic. The conspiracy is both inside and outside the self at the same time, with the result that
mind-control victims are never sure whether their
thoughts and desires are their own or someone
else’s. Such a situation maps a cultural concern over
the stability of the self that can be aligned with modern and postmodern concerns over consciousness
and the question of how far identity is constructed
within consciousness and how far it is a product of
external reality systems such as the circulation of
information and images in society or the operations
of cultural ideology.
Related to this is the concern over the “death of
reality.” If reality cannot be observed objectively as
an empirical fact and then guaranteed by the senseperceptions of the individual (because it is unclear
whether it is a product of cognitive experience or
created by a program, an implant, or a conditioning
process generated by mind control) then it becomes
an unknowable and uncertain phenomenon. Such a
concern plays out twentieth-century anxieties over
the nature of reality, but also revisits older philosophical debates between empiricism and metaphysics about what exists and how we come to know
it (ontology and epistemology, respectively), but
from a paranoid perspective. Where empiricism
tends to believe in a reality that is knowable only
through observation (arguably a paranoid perspective in itself), metaphysics assumes that knowledge
of reality is pre-given (usually in form of the soul)
481

Mind Control

This frame grab shows a very brief subliminal message that appears at the end of a Republican National Committee
television ad critical of U.S. vice-president and Democratic presidential candidate Al Gore’s position on prescription
drugs, saying that the plan of Republican presidential George W. Bush gives people more flexibility in choosing their
health care while the Gore plan “lets bureaucrats decide.” Bush said the $2.5 million ad, which aired 4,400 times, would
be taken out of circulation. (AFP/Corbis)

where observation simply confirms what is already
intuitively known. Mind-control conspiracies reenact such a belief in a secular form, within which
the soul is replaced by a material (and often industrial) agent such as a program or an implant, that
has a malign, rather than a benign, influence, not
only because it displaces free will, but also because
it displaces God.
When considering such a position, it is unsurprising that many contemporary mind-control conspiracy
theorists, such as Texe Marrs or Ron Patton, have a
fundamentalist Christian outlook. The former sees
mind control in the operation of “Project L.U.C.I.D.”
which he claims is a far-reaching conspiracy to control all individuals through invasive technologies,
while the latter concocts an occult and satanic conspiracy behind the mythical Nazi/CIA mind-control
program “Project Monarch.” What both articulate in
their conspiracies is a fear of the soulless body, a
dominant feature of many mind-control narratives,
482

which see the self-willed body replaced by one that
simply follows a program. Many recent conspiracy
theories have made connections with mind control in
order to envisage a society where people are simply
bodies or pieces of meat. Conspiracy theories that
focus on alien experimentation on humans or the use
of implants by governments represent an anxiety that
the human body is just a thing or a functional unit (for
example, in remote viewing conspiracies, where a
person simply becomes a pair of eyes designed to
observe and transmit data).
Related to such concerns are notions of the death
of the human, something that is most obvious in
those UFO narratives that focus on the probing of
the human body and its modification for use by
aliens. In such conspiracies, the human body is
altered so that it no longer operates by human desires, feelings, or thoughts, but as an alien body by
proxy (controlled by an alien mind), performing “inhuman” activities by unknowingly conspiring against

Mind Control

the human species. An extension of such concerns
can also be found in mind-control narratives that
have their basis in governmental conspiracies, as for
example in the stories Cathy O’Brien tells of her
experiences as a CIA sex slave, during which George
Bush, Sr., is said to have transformed into a lizard
alien in front of her, an imaginative trope that is
designed to show the inhumanity of mind control.
The development of telemetric implants and fictionalizations of cyborg technology on film have also led
to a concern with the death of the human, but this
time at the hands of technology. In both alien and
technological mind-control conspiracies, there is an
anxiety that humans are becoming less than human
and more like Descartes’s “animal-machine,” which
is governed by its instinct (or program) rather than
by rationality and thought. There is also a related
concern that the mind and body have become separated because the body is simply a soulless piece of
meat whose “mind” exists externally in the mind of
its human, cybernetic, or alien controller. Telemetric
implant and cyborg mind-control narratives represent such a process by reference to the transformation of the human into the machine and articulate a
pervasive technophobia or fear of science that can be
seen in many other mind-control conspiracies,
whether this control occurs through hypnotism (with
its connections to mesmerism), Pavlovian conditioning, electroshock therapy, the use of laboratorycreated LSD, or through the introduction of literal
implants, such as the “stimoceiver” (see below), into
the human body.
Finally, mind-control conspiracies can be seen to
articulate a very postmodern concern with the end
of knowledge. The fact that mind-control victims do
not know whether their thoughts are their own or
those of another, transmitted to them through conditioning, programming, or the telemetric transmission of signals, highlights a concern that information
is no longer knowable as an objectively verifiable
truth. Knowledge has become untrustworthy, partly
because the individual is unable to legitimate knowledge any more but primarily because the information received is either strategic (where the mindcontrol puppet only has a version of truth that will
enable him or her to carry out the task, as with

Sirhan Sirhan, according to Alex Constantine) or is
composed of disinformation, designed to mislead
the mind-control victim into believing that reality is
other than it actually is.
The Origins of Mind-Control Conspiracies
Although the above ideas suggest that mind control
is paradigmatic of postmodern conspiracy theory
(because of the radical unknowability it creates with
regard to every aspect of contemporary culture),
mind control has its origins in industrial modernity.
As with many conspiracy theories, the genealogy of
mind control takes in both fiction and history, albeit
an invented alternative history where scientific experimentation is rewritten as a secret cabalistic plan
that involves human torture and social engineering
on a large scale. In some respects, such a portrayal
can be said to be accurate when applied, for example, to the Victorian practice of lobotomizing female
inmates of mental institutions, which entailed an
obvious and destructive form of mind control. However, most conspiracy discourses on mind control in
the period of modernity are characterized by a paranoid anxiety over scientific inquiry, notably in the
writings of Jim Keith. In several texts, Keith has
traced a history of mind control that incorporates
early experiments with hypnotism, eugenics,
Freudian and Jungian psychiatry, behavioral psychology, and John Dewey’s educational theories, that
when imaginatively linked, by Keith, to governmental intelligence agencies through key figures such as
Cecil Rhodes, H. G. Wells, and Aldous Huxley generates early signs of what was to become the New
World Order.
Such a history is typical of mind-control conspiracies and many of the same figures or ideas constantly
recur. The eighteenth-century Austrian physician
Friedrich Anton Mesmer, for example, is given a key
role in early mind-control narratives because “mesmerism,” which was actually the application of magnetism to animal or human bodies, has become synonymous with hypnotism in popular and conspiracy
consciousness as a result of the belief that the use of
magnetic induction creates involuntary bodily movements that suggest control of the mind. Other important figures in the genealogy of mind control are
483

Mind Control

Sigmund Freud and the behaviorists B. F. Skinner
and I. P. Pavlov. The latter is central to mind-control
conspiracies because his experiments to induce dogs
to salivate at the sounding of a bell (which indicated
that food was on its way) have become a paradigm for
anxieties over the possibility of a similar conditioning
being applied to human beings.
Although the origins of mind control can be found
in a reinvented history of psychological and medical
science, there are also elements that are based solely
on fiction. George du Maurier’s novel of 1894,
Trilby, with its representation of the figure of Svengali, introduces one of the first images of a puppetmaster controlling his protegé, Trilby, by means of
hypnotism and mesmeric induction. The omnipotent master controlling a slave in this way has become one of the dominant images of contemporary
mind-control narratives and finds form, for example,
in conspiracies surrounding Project Monarch and
CIA sex slave stories. Another fictional influence of
mind-control conspiracies can be found in cinematic
representations where the concern over the robotic
or zombielike nature of mind-control victims indicates how far mind-control conspiracies are a product of science fiction and horror film. The unthinking robot, controlled by its program, or the zombie
of 1930s Hollywood cinema, who is given an order
that it slavishly obeys, are dominant figurations of
the mind-controlled puppet who similarly has no
mind of his or her own. Specifically, Fritz Lang’s
Metropolis (1926) has a significant place in forming
the discourses of mind control. It has an omnipotent
controller in the Svengali mould, in the figure of
Rottwang, whose representation as a “mad scientist”
has been applied in conspiracy theory to historical
figures such as Sidney Gottlieb and Ewen Cameron
of the MK-ULTRA program and to John B. Watson,
who attempted to apply Pavlov’s experiments to
humans. The most important facet of mind control
in the film, however, is Rottwang’s creation of a robot
that can be controlled and its subsequent use as a
replacement for the rebel heroine, Maria, a substitution of the human by the machine that acts as a displaced figuration of the mind-controlled victim. A
further aspect of the film that is of note for mind
control is the depiction of the worker-slaves, who are
484

presented as no different from the robot Rottwang
creates because they are already programmed to act
and work in a regimented fashion.
These influences suggest that mind-control conspiracy theories have their origin in anxieties over
the development of industrialization and its concomitant technologization of society in the period of
modernity. The two main cultural forces that mindcontrol conspiracies respond to are the rationalization of industrial production and social organization,
and the development of a mass culture. These are
concerns that are articulated by Metropolis, for
example, and that are extended in the contemporary
societies of advanced economies (and most particularly, in the United States) in the hyper-rationalization and bureaucratization of everyday life (by governments and, increasingly, corporations) and in the
extension of mass production to mass consumption.
Fear of rationalization is not confined to mindcontrol conspiracies and, indeed, can be seen to be
a staple of any conspiracy theory’s fear of a hidden
system controlling everyday life, but one feature that
is specific to mind control is the identification of the
Nazis as key players in the creation of postwar projects such as Project Monarch (as Patton claims) or
the influential role their eugenic experiments and
propaganda techniques have apparently had on
areas as diverse as MK-ULTRA’s claimed involvement
in social engineering or on the development of subliminal advertising. The Nazis, as proponents of a
totalitarian form of rationalized social control and as
architects of a mass culture based on propaganda,
become the nightmare of modernity that generates
much mind-control conspiracy theory. They are also
one of the reasons why eugenics is frequently mentioned in relation to mind control, although this is
also part of a more general distrust of science that
characterizes mind-control theories. The location of
the origins of mind control in modernity can thus be
seen in the fears of rationalization generated by the
creation of many national and global institutions in
this period, as well as by a fear of the “mass” that
accompanies processes of industrial production,
particularly as these are applied to society in Nazi
ideology. Such concerns can be identified in mindcontrol conspiracies’ anxieties over the mass pro-

Mind Control

gramming of individuals in contemporary society as
part of a wider attempt to control society by a conspiracy group. Mind control thus represents not a
conspiracy in itself but constitutes, for conspiracy
theorists, a symptom of larger conspiratorial projects
based on anxieties over social and cultural structures
that developed at the beginning of the twentieth
century and that have been extended into contemporary culture.
The Mass Media and Subliminal Advertising
One of the first mind-control conspiracy theories of
the postwar period is related to this general sense
of a secret manipulation of consciousness as a sign
of some unknown conspiracy at work in society.
Fears over the mass media and its apparent brainwashing of the U.S. public were a pervasive anxiety
in the 1950s when the development of television in
conjunction with a culture of consumerism and
visual advertising led to an unease over the application of mass and rationalized structures to the social
scene. Such anxieties had already been raised by
Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer in their
Marxist analysis of media institutions such as the
Hollywood studio system and national radio in the
United States of the 1940s, which, while predominantly a discussion of the operations of ideology in
society, can be seen as a paranoid response to mass
culture in their concerns with the way citizens’
active involvement in social relations is replaced by
a more passive reception of social and cultural values and beliefs. The concern over the influence of
television and the mass media that developed in the
1950s, as detailed by Marling, follows such a structure, but stems from a liberal intellectual concern
over the “dumbing down” of society.
A more particular example of mass-media mind
control can be found in one of the founding mindcontrol texts, Vance Packard’s The Hidden Persuaders, published in 1957. Here, Packard drew
attention to the practices used by the advertising
industry to influence consumers in their choice of
products, implying a form of mind control in the
process, but he also mentioned experiments with
subliminal advertising. During the 1950s an advertising executive, James Vicary, allegedly developed

subliminal advertising when he flashed the words
“Eat Popcorn” and “Drink Coke” onto a cinema
screen over the course of a six-week experiment. He
claimed that there had been a large rise in sales of
these products as a result of his campaign, claims
that led to popular fears about subliminal advertising, their investigation by the Federal Communications Commission, and their banning in Britain and
Australia. Subliminal advertising has had a significant impact on conspiracy theory’s distrust of official
media institutions as a result of such claims, despite
the fact that Vicary later admitted that he had fabricated his findings. As a consequence, fears about
subliminal messages on television have continued to
have currency in a variety of ways, as Dan Kelly
notes, in his discussion of Wilson Bryan Key’s allegations that the mass media is corrupting society by
inserting images of sex and death into its televisual
programming. Similarly, Texe Marrs’s claims about
the development of a cyber-conspiracy involving the
tracking of individuals through their purchases
aligns itself with a fear of the practices of the mass
media, in its corporate forms, and grows out of this
early subliminal-advertising conspiracy theory. More
specifically, the acceptance of subliminal transmissions has also led to the conspiracy belief that media
institutions are an extension of governmental forces
or a manifestation of larger conspiracies because of
the implication of brainwashing that this alleged
practice entails. Such a belief is argued by Alex Constantine, who claims that a secret governmental
project called Operation Mockingbird was created
in order to use television as a propaganda medium.
He goes further than this, however, and also alleges
that there was another program, called Operation
Octopus, begun in 1948, that was a surveillance
project designed to turn televisions into transmitters
that would, in Big Brother fashion, send images or
messages to and from people’s living rooms.
CIA Mind Control: MK-ULTRA, and
Manchurian Candidates
At the same time that subliminal advertising was
allegedly brainwashing the consumers of the United
States, an actual mind-control program was in operation, run by the CIA and military intelligence
485

Mind Control

under a variety of code names (Projects Chatter,
Bluebird, and Artichoke) but which in 1953 developed into an umbrella project called MK-ULTRA.
Documented evidence of these mind-control
experiments became more widely known following
governmental investigations in the 1970s, which
revealed that MK-ULTRA, under the control of Sidney Gottlieb, had engaged in 149 projects and subprojects between 1953 and 1963 and had investigated a wide range of areas including the use of
electroshock, sensory deprivation, hypnotism, radiation, and drugs such as LSD in order to effect
behavioral modifications in the tested subjects.
Many of these experiments were carried out on CIA
and other governmental employees, but there were
also LSD projects that involved tests on unwitting
subjects either within the military (such as Frank
Olsen, who committed suicide after a psychotic
trauma, possibly as a result of having been given
LSD without his knowledge), in hospitals or, in one
case, a prison for people convicted of drugs offenses.
Although MK-ULTRA dealt with many areas of mind
control, it is the development and testing of LSD
that has attracted the most attention because, in the
form of Operation Midnight Climax, it was taken out
of governmental institutions and applied to the general American public. In this phase, members of the
public were tested in apartments in New York and
San Francisco, while their responses were filmed or
recorded through two-way mirrors.
MK-ULTRA has probably had the most impact on
mind-control conspiracy theory because it provides
substantiated evidence for government involvement in attempts to control people’s behavior. What
began as a response to military concerns that the
Soviet Union and China had developed truth drugs
and brainwashing techniques has become, in conspiracy theory, part of a large-scale attempt by the
government or other groups, such as the New
World Order, to exercise domination through social
engineering. For conspiracy theorists, the government argument that MK-ULTRA was a response to
Soviet brainwashing during the Korean War is a
cover to conceal the reality of the program: the use
of mind control against U.S. citizens. Alex Constantine, for example, dates the start of Project Mock486

ingbird, the government/media conspiracy to control people’s minds through propaganda, to 1963 in
order to signal that the end of the internal MKULTRA experiments was only the beginning of their
real purpose, which was their external application
to the people of the United States. MK-ULTRA has
also spawned “Manchurian Candidate” conspiracies, which have their origin in John Marks’s The
Search for the Manchurian Candidate. Marks’s
book is predominantly an account of the LSD
experiments of MK-ULTRA, but includes many oftquoted chapters toward the end on the work of Dr.
Ewen Cameron in Montreal and on CIA hypnosis
programs that apparently dealt with the question of
whether it would be possible to program a human
being in the first instance and then whether an individual could be programmed to be a mindcontrolled assassin. This hypothesis has gained
much popularity in conspiracy theory, particularly
in relation to the assassinations or attempted assassinations of political figures or celebrities since the
1960s. It has variously been claimed that Lee Harvey Oswald, Sirhan Sirhan, Mark Chapman, and
John Hinckley were all in some way programmed to
perform deeds that they would otherwise be incapable of as conscious human beings, but which they
could perform if they were hypnotized by governmental or conspiracy groups (Oswald and Sirhan) or
brainwashed by a conspiracy-controlled media
(Chapman and Hinckley). The latter position has
become increasingly evident recently, with claims
that the Columbine killers, Eric Harris and Dylan
Klebold, were indoctrinated to act as “Manchurian
Candidates” by a media culture that will produce
more of the same, a conspiracy theory that, like
Constantine’s Operation Mockingbird, sees the successful extension of CIA mind control into a program of social engineering on a national scale.
Project Monarch and CIA Sex Slaves
Project Mockingbird is only one of several mindcontrol programs that has been imagined as a result
of revelations about MK-ULTRA. One of the most significant of these other mind-control conspiracies is
Project Monarch, which originates with Cathy
O’Brien’s book about her experiences as a CIA

Mind Control

mind-controlled sex slave, Trance Formation of
America. O’Brien relates how she was programmed
under Project Monarch, by use of the creation of a
multiple personality disorder, hypnosis, and the use
of visual and auditory stimuli (such as Disney films)
as well as occult training, to generate an alternative
personality that is able to perform degrading acts at
the will of a controller. Such a conspiracy theory
highlights the notion of the death of the human that
inheres within mind-control conspiracies, in that
O’Brien develops a personality that can be triggered so that it will perform “inhuman” acts that
her real human self could not contemplate. Similar
stories have been offered by Candy Jones, who, like
O’Brien, makes much of the her sensational revelations about sex with political figures and with
celebrities.
Although even many conspiracy theorists (such
as Keith) are skeptical of the sensational aspects of
O’Brien’s story, many of her “revelations” about
mind control in Project Monarch have entered conspiracy culture. As a result of her book, belief in
satanic and occult practices as well as allegations of
child abuse often accompany contemporary stories
about Project Monarch, associations that, like the
earlier linking of eugenics with mind control, are
designed to demonstrate how unnatural and inhuman a process it is to divorce someone from his or
her real identity by creating a substitute personality
that can be triggered at will. It is the Project
Monarch conspiracy theory that has done much to
spawn the notion of the mind-controlled puppet,
and its use of programs and “trigger” devices has
become widely accepted as real processes in the
practice of mind control. Project Monarch conspiracy theories also list in detail the code-names and
levels of mind-controlled subjects that the CIA has
operating for it:
• Alpha, which is general programming
• Beta, sex-slave programming
• Gamma, programming to allow the subject to
deceive and misdirect
• Theta, psychic programming designed to create assassins
• Omega, a self-destruct programming

Although these are alleged CIA designations, the
types of programming they create have also been
applied beyond Project Monarch in areas such as
cult brainwashing, although figures such as Keith
and Patton both suggest connections between Project Monarch and religious cults; in the case of the
former by tracing Jim Jones’s apparent links to the
CIA, and in the case of the latter by a more general
association of cult and occult. In these forms, Project Monarch has become an all-purpose “umbrella”
conspiracy that can be applied to any group that is
suspected of using mind-control techniques. What
such a view also indicates is that, unlike other mindcontrol conspiracy theories, Project Monarch is no
longer simply a functional way of getting people to
do a conspiracy’s bidding or even a sign of a conspiracy at work, but has become a conspiracy in
itself with its own objectives, operations, and connections with other conspiracy groups, such as the
Illuminati, Skull and Bones, or the New World
Order.
Technological and UFO Mind Control
Cathy O’Brien also relates how, because of her photographic memory, she was used by the CIA for
“remote viewing” operations that involved her
observing files that she would then repeat back to
her controllers. Although this is not strictly speaking
mind control, remote viewing has become a staple
of mind-control conspiracy theory in recent years
because it implies the use of ESP or other psychic
powers. In conjunction with technological anxieties
it enters the domain of mind control in the form of
the artificial brain implant. A pervasive fear of
advanced technology, whether human or alien, is
indicated by these conspiracies, even though they
have a history extending to the CIA conspiracies of
MK-ULTRA. One of the seminal figures in implant
conspiracies is José Delgado, a Spanish scientist
who taught at Yale University in the 1950s and
1960s. Delgado developed a device called the “stimoceiver” that could be inserted into the brain and
which, according to conspiracy theory, allowed the
transmission of electrical impulses directly to it
from elsewhere. This has led to a range of conspiracies around the notion of the remote-controlled
487

Mind Control

cyborg who responds to commands sent from a distant controller. Delgado’s work is said, for example,
to have led to a CIA program called “Sleeping
Beauty” in a laboratory in New Mexico, but there
have been more recent conspiracies around
implants such as tracking devices, which generated
claims about Timothy McVeigh having had a similar
device implanted in his buttocks by the army, the
Digital Angel, a device that verifies consumer identity (and a significant influence on Marrs’s consumerist cyber-conspiracy), and the “Soul Catcher,”
a computer chip that can record and replay people’s
experiences.
Such biometric technology is also a staple of alien
abduction narratives, which share a similar anxiety
over the application of advanced, or superior, technology to the human body. As with the use of
human implants, these mind-control conspiracies
focus on the way in which the body is treated simply as a thing or a mindless puppet to be used by a
superior power. Such anxieties are inherent within
alien abduction narratives, with their stories of alien
experimentation and penetration of the human
body, but they also have a mind-control element in
conspiracies that focus on the insertion of implants
into the body when the human subject is returned
to Earth. Examples can be found in television fictions, such as Scully’s neck implant in The X-Files or
the implantation of actual aliens in Dark Skies, but
they also have currency in conspiracy theory itself.
Budd Hopkins, for example, claims that many people are operating under the influence of alien
implants that have three possible functions: operating as tracking devices, as monitors akin to remote
viewing implants, or as receivers that turn the subject into a puppet under the command of an alien
operator.
A final aspect to mind-control conspiracies are
those that revolve around “Big Science” projects
developed by the United States and the Soviet
Union during the cold war. These range across a
variety of areas, including the development of
plasma weapons, or the use of microwave transmissions or electromagnetic low frequency radiation
(ELF), all of which have similar effects in the creation of a buzzing in the head and which are used to
488

beam in emotions, messages, or commands. The
weapons function by modifying the frequency of
brainwaves so that they are susceptible to the
receipt of outside commands, and specific conspiracy examples of such remote control weapons
include the HAARP project, the saturation of the
United States embassy in Moscow by microwave
during the 1980s, and Alex Constantine’s theory
that Reagan’s Star Wars project was actually a system of orbiting masers designed to beam commands into people’s minds on a global scale. Unlike
implant mind control, such conspiracies return
mind-control theories to their roots in rationalized
industrialization, so that rather than dealing with
“individuals” by implanting telemetric devices one
by one, people can be controlled and brainwashed
on a mass scale. Although theories surrounding the
use of such mass weapons of mind control are relatively recent, the concerns raised go back to the origins of mind control itself and can be found in other
forms, such as fears around the fluoridation of
water (which has also been claimed to be a way of
inducing mind control), but also more generally in
the fears that the twentieth century produced a culture in advanced societies where individuals are not
treated as such, but as cattle or as “sheeple.”
Fran Mason
See also: Central Intelligence Agency; Jonestown;
Kennedy, John F., Assassination of; Kennedy, Robert
F., Assassination of; LSD; The Manchurian
Candidate; MK-ULTRA; Oswald, Lee Harvey;
Subliminal Advertising; UFOs; The X-Files.
References
Adorno, Theodor, and Max Horkheimer. 1979.
Dialectic of Enlightenment. London: Verso.
Constantine, Alex. 1995. Psychic Dictatorship in the
U.S.A. Portland, OR: Feral House.
———. 1997. Virtual Government: CIA Mind
Control Operations in America. Venice, CA: Feral
House.
Guffey, Robert. 1999. “Honey, Did You Leave Your
Brain Back in Langley Again? A Brief History of
Modern Mind Control.” In The Conspiracy
Reader, ed. Al Hidell and Joan D’Arc. Secaucus,
NJ: Citadel Press.
Hopkins, Budd. 1987. Intruders: The Incredible
Visitations at Copley Woods. New York: Random
House.

MJ-12

Keith, Jim. 1997. Mind Control, World Control: The
Encyclopedia of Mind Control. Kempton, IL:
Adventures Unlimited Press.
———. 1999. Mass Control: Engineering Human
Consciousness. Lilburn, GA: Illuminet Press.
Kelly, Dan. 2000. “Hi-Tech Market Research.” In
Apocalypse Culture II, ed. Adam Parfrey. Venice,
CA: Feral House.
Key, Wilson Bryan. 1974. Subliminal Seduction.
New York: Signet.
Lee, Martin A., and Bruce Shlain. 1986. Acid
Dreams: The Complete Social History of LSD:
The CIA, the Sixties, and Beyond. New York:
Grove.
Marks, John. 1991. The Search for the Manchurian
Candidate. New York: W. W. Norton
Marling, Karal Ann. 1996. As Seen on TV: The
Visual Culture of Everyday Life in the 1950s.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Marrs, Texe. 1996. Project L.U.C.I.D. Austin, TX:
Living Truth Publishers.
O’Brien, Cathy. 1995. Trance Formation of America:
The True Life Story of a CIA Mind Control Slave.
Nashville, TN: Reality Marketing.
Packard, Vance. 1985. The Hidden Persuaders. New
York: Pocket Books.
Patton, Ron. 1996. “Project Monarch: Nazi Mind
Control.” Paranoia: The Conspiracy Reader 4: 3.

MJ-12
The conviction that the U.S. government is perpetrating a massive cover-up of extraterrestrial visits to
the planet has become the source of vicious battles
over the validity of the so-called “MJ-12” documents. In 1987, William Moore and Stanton Friedman, two prominent ufologists, along with Jamie
Shandera, a television producer, claimed to have
come into possession of an eight-page document
classified “TOPIC SECRET/MAJIC-EYES ONLY.”
The subtitle read “BRIEFING DOCUMENT:
OPERATION MAJESTIC-12; PREPARED FOR
PRESIDENT-ELECT DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER,” and was dated 18 November 1952.
“Majestic–12” was later shortened to “MAJIC-12,”
or merely “MJ-12.”
This document supposedly contained proof of a
government program initiated by President Harry
Truman and directed by twelve military, scientific,

and intelligence community leaders to deal with the
recovery of an alien spacecraft that wrecked near
Roswell, New Mexico. Authorities supposedly discovered four dead aliens who had ejected from the
craft before it crashed. Although the bodies were in
a state of decomposition, enough remained to be
preserved, collected, and taken to government laboratories for analysis and study. Among the twelve
members of MJ-12 were Vannevar Bush and James
Forrestal, who died in May 1949 and whose vacancy
was left unfilled. Forrestal supposedly was directed
by Truman in May 1947 to “proceed with all due
speed and caution.” A cover story was concocted by
MJ-12 that attributed the Roswell debris to weather
research balloons.
Authorities claimed that the recovered “aliens”
did not originate on Earth, but could only speculate
as to where they had come from. Writing on the
wreckage supposedly was indecipherable, leading
to a secret Air Force project, SIGN, to determine
the craft’s purpose and mission. The MJ-12 documents also refer to a 6 December 1950 crash near
El Indio, Texas, which had burned up during entry
into the atmosphere or upon impact.
When Dwight Eisenhower was elected president
in 1952, the story continues, he came into knowledge of MJ-12 and continued the high level of
secrecy. He noted the implications for national
security and maintained MJ-12 under close wraps
to avoid a “public panic.”
Moore, Friedman, and Shandera became aware
of the document when Shandera received a roll of
film in December 1984 that contained images of
the MJ-12 memo to Eisenhower. But skeptics
pointed out a number of problems with the documents, and challenged their authenticity. Debunker
Philip Klass found numerous discrepancies that
called into question the style of dating (i.e., “18
November, 1952” rather than either November 18,
1952, or 18 Nov. 1952, both of which were in common use, whereas the former was not). The type on
the documents matched no typewriter in existence
at the time, but did match a Smith-Corona made in
1963. Most damning, though, UFO skeptic Philip
Klass found an exact duplicate of the Truman signature in the Library of Congress and contended that
489

MK-ULTRA

the 1957 memo had forged Truman’s signature. But
the documents were so realistic that even Defense
Department agents assessed the MJ-12 items.
Moore, the mastermind behind the documents
intrigue, claimed to have played along with government investigators to gain official information about
UFOs. Some accuse him of perpetrating a hoax.
Stanton Friedman, who broke with Moore over
other issues, nevertheless continued to be involved in
the MJ-12 debate by publishing Top Secret/MAJIC
in 1996. He concluded that the documents appeared
to have been prepared by people inside government,
but could not determine whether they were genuine
or deliberate deceptions. Although he challenged
some of Klass’s points used to discredit MJ-12, Friedman only managed to “prove” noncontroversial truisms, such as the fact that those men on the list would
likely have been on such a list, if one existed. More
damaging to the documents’ veracity, however, was a
14 July 1954 government memo found by Moore and
Shandera in the National Archives from the special
assistant to the president, Robert Cutler, to General
Nathan Twining, which is generally regarded as a forgery and a “plant.”
Despite Freedom of Information Act access, no
one has produced any other documents specifically
referring to either the existence of MJ-12 or alluding to any of their findings, save extremely oblique
references that could apply to any program. Making
matters even more complicated was the convenience of how the documents appeared—dropped
onto Shandera’s front porch in a plain brown bag at
the very time he was working with Moore on a UFO
documentary. The further good fortune of the
researchers, in that all the MJ-12 documents confirmed exactly what Moore had already written,
caused even UFO conspiracy theorists to look with
disbelief upon the serendipitous delivery. Another
convenient fact was that every man named in the
MJ-12 list was dead when the documents mysteriously appeared, and thus they were unable to confirm the veracity of the list or the group’s mission.
As charges and countercharges flew, almost every
person involved in the debate was accused of being
a CIA “plant” or government “stooge.” Moore himself was viewed as spreading disinformation through
490

forged documents so as to discredit “the movement.” On the other hand, Klass and others were
lambasted as government fronts.
Larry Schweikart
See also: Roswell; UFOs.
References
Friedman, Stanton. 1996. TOP SECRET/MAJIC.
New York: Marlowe and Company. 1996.
Klass, Philip J. 1987–1988. “The MJ-12 CrashedSaucer Documents.” Skeptical Inquirer, Winter,
137–146.
———. 1988. “The MJ-12 Papers: Part 2.” Skeptical
Inquirer, Spring, 279–289.
Peebles, Curtis. 1994. Watch the Skies! A Chronicle
of the Flying Saucer Myth. Washington, DC:
Smithsonian Institution Press.

MK-ULTRA
Much beloved by conspiracy theorists because it
provides documented evidence to support claims
that the U.S. government is involved in secret and
hostile operations against its own citizens, MK-ULTRA
was a covert CIA mind-control research project that
lasted from 1953 to 1963. The program developed
out of another CIA project, Bluebird (begun in 1950
and renamed Artichoke in 1951), which was principally concerned with psychological manipulation
and had concerns similar to the navy’s Project Chatter, which was begun in 1947 (lasting until 1953) and
which dealt with the discovery and application of
truth drugs similar to those that the Soviet Union
was alleged to have developed. Both MK-ULTRA and
Chatter expanded substantially during the Korean
War because of the belief that Soviet forces had successfully used truth drugs and brainwashing techniques on prisoners of war. MK-ULTRA was authorized by CIA Director Allen Dulles in 1953 and was
put into effect by the director of operations, Richard
Helms, as an “umbrella project” that combined the
interests of Bluebird, Artichoke, and Chatter. Under
the control of Dr. Sidney Gottlieb the program engaged in research on a range of projects relating to
drugs, toxins, hypnotism, and other forms of behavioral modification. This general focus on the transformation and control of personality has led to a
widespread belief among conspiracy theorists that

MK-ULTRA

its military applications were actually a cover for
attempts to pacify and control civilian populations,
most notably the citizens of the United States.
Under Gottlieb, MK-ULTRA combined the psychological concerns of Bluebird/Artichoke with the
interest in drugs found in the navy’s Project Chatter.
The general aim of the project was to find ways of
conditioning personnel to resist interrogation by
hostile powers or to achieve the opposite through
the development of control of individuals through
interrogation, hypnosis, sensory deprivation, and
use of drugs. There were many non-drug-related
programs in the 149 subprojects that came within
MK-ULTRA’s portfolio, some of which involved hypnosis, investigations of magic, studies of sleep patterns, research on brain concussion, research into
stimulus and response in biological systems, radiation, ESP, electroshock therapy, and projects that
simply involved funding actual operations or their
extension abroad under the MK-NAOMI designation,
for example those taking place at the Allan Memorial Institute in Montreal. The drug programs have
gained the most attention, however, in part because
these were a development of overseas experiments
that had already taken place regarding the use of
sodium pentothal, but also because MK-ULTRA
expanded the use of narcotic agents over the course
of the program so that the CIA’s experimentation
with drugs, in particular LSD, has become the bestknown area of the project in popular consciousness.
The development of LSD and its experimentation
on members of the CIA, military personnel, and
mental patients formed the early phase of MKULTRA’s investigation of drugs in the 1950s. Many of
those involved in investigating its effects, such as
Gottlieb himself, were habitual users of the drug,
and stories of LSD-spiked drinks at parties form
some of the most sensational aspects of this opening
phase. The main body of research, however, was
performed on volunteer subjects who were tested in
sensory deprivation chambers, under hypnosis, or
who had aural stimuli played to them while dosed
with LSD or other drugs such as mescaline. Some of
the subjects, however, were tested without their
consent, such as Frank Olsen, whose suicide as a
result of a psychotic episode has been attributed to

the fact that he was given LSD without his knowledge. Another major part of the early phase was the
testing of narcotics in government, medical, and
educational institutions, with one of the first studies
taking place at the National Institute of Mental
Health’s Addiction Research Center in Lexington,
where prison inmates serving sentences for drug
violations were dosed with LSD in exchange for
heroin.
The most notorious feature of MK-ULTRA, and the
feature that is most commonly associated with it, is
the testing of LSD in CIA-rented apartments in
New York and San Francisco as part of Operation
Midnight Climax, which formed the final phase of
the program. During this phase LSD was tested on
unwitting subjects in everyday society by undercover agents (with the assent of the Federal Bureau
of Narcotics) who used prostitutes to bring men
back to apartments with two-way mirrors where
they were given LSD and their reactions were
recorded. This led to further tests and a more general distribution of LSD that has led to the general
perception, as Lee and Shlain argue, that the CIA
helped to create the 1960s counterculture or, alternatively, as Jim Keith asserts, that the counterculture
was part of a CIA plot to channel youthful dissent
into passive and nonviolent areas, with some of its
key figures, such as Jerry Garcia and Timothy Leary,
acting as CIA agents or stooges to achieve this plan.
The MK-ULTRA program was brought to an end in
1963 and most of the papers relating to it were
destroyed in 1973 on the orders of CIA director
Richard Helms. The program was subject to several
hearings in the 1970s, when knowledge of CIA
involvement in mind control and in the development and distribution of LSD entered the public
domain. The program was the subject of investigations by the Rockefeller Commission in 1975, the
Church Committee in 1976, and hearings by Senator Edward Kennedy in 1975 and 1977.
The papers and reports from these investigations
form the bulk of the material used by conspiracy theorists, although they usually quote from Marks’s The
Search for the Manchurian Candidate or Bowart’s
Operation Mind Control, rather than directly from
their original source. The revelations about MK-ULTRA
491

The Molly Maguires

have led to a range of conspiracy theories, mainly
involving the attempts by various agencies or conspiracy groups to pacify and control the population of
the United States through mind control and the
release of drugs into the environment. Keith, for
example, claims that MK-ULTRA is part of a larger New
World Order plot and that there have already been
attempts to use LSD to pacify large numbers of people in the New York subway system. The factual basis
of MK-ULTRA has been used to spin other elaborate
plots, particularly when in conjunction with the
mythical mind-control operation called “Project
Monarch,” which, according to Ron Patton, is orchestrated by Nazis, occult groups, and the Illuminati, all
of whom work in the service of the Antichrist rather
than for any mere earthly power.
Fran Mason
See also: Central Intelligence Agency; LSD; The
Manchurian Candidate; Mind Control.
References
Bowart, Walter. 1977. Operation Mind Control. New
York: Dell.
Keith, Jim. 1997. Mind Control, World Control: The
Encyclopedia of Mind Control. Kempton, IL:
Adventures Unlimited Press.
Lee, Martin A., and Bruce Shlain. 1986. Acid
Dreams: The Complete Social History of LSD:
The CIA, the Sixties, and Beyond. New York:
Grove.
Marks, John. 1991. The Search for the Manchurian
Candidate. New York: W. W. Norton.
Papers from the Select Committee on Intelligence
and Committee on Human Resources. 1977.
Washington, DC; U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Patton, Ron. 1996. “Project Monarch: Nazi Mind
Control.” Paranoia: The Conspiracy Reader 4: 3.

The Molly Maguires
Twenty young Irishmen were hanged in the anthracite region of northeast Pennsylvania in the late
1870s, convicted of a series of killings stretching back
to the Civil War. The convicted men were members
of an alleged secret society called the “Molly
Maguires,” said to have been imported from the Irish
countryside, where a society of the same name was
active in the 1840s. In Pennsylvania the Molly
492

Maguires apparently acted behind the cover of an
ostensibly peaceful Irish fraternal organization called
the Ancient Order of Hibernians (AOH). The case
was cracked by a Pinkerton detective, James McParlan, who spent almost two years in the coal district
working undercover. More than fifty Molly Maguires
went on trial between 1875 and 1878; twenty were
executed and twenty more went to prison. The first
ten Molly Maguires were hanged on a single day, 21
June 1877, known to the people of the anthracite
region ever since as “Black Thursday.”
The Molly Maguires stood accused of killing as
many as sixteen mine owners, superintendents,
bosses, and workers. Their trials, conducted in the
midst of enormously hostile national publicity, were
a travesty of justice. The defendants were arrested
by the private police force of the Philadelphia &
Reading Railroad, whose ambitious president,
Franklin B. Gowen, had financed the Pinkerton
operation. They were convicted on the evidence of
an undercover detective who was accused (somewhat half-heartedly) by the defense of being an
agent provocateur, supplemented by the confessions of a series of informers who had turned state’s
evidence to save their necks. Irish Catholics were
excluded from the juries as a matter of course. Most
of the prosecuting attorneys worked for railroads
and mining companies. Remarkably, Franklin B.
Gowen himself appeared as the star prosecutor at
several trials, with his courtroom speeches rushed
into print as popular pamphlets. In effect, the AOH
itself was put on trial: mere membership of that
organization was presented as de facto membership
of the Molly Maguires, and membership of either
was routinely presented by the prosecution as evidence of guilt—on charges not simply of belonging
to an oath-bound society but of using that society to
plan and execute diabolical crimes.
Viewed in retrospect, the case of the Molly
Maguires displayed many of the classic hallmarks
of a U.S. conspiracy theory. Even by nineteenthcentury standards the arrests, trials, and executions
were flagrant in their abuse of judicial procedure
and their flaunting of corporate power. Yet only a
handful of dissenting voices were to be heard,
chiefly those of labor radicals. To explain why some-

The Molly Maguires

thing like this could happen it is important to
understand why the prosecution’s depiction of the
Irish defendants seemed so convincing to contemporaries. The prosecution offered no plausible
explanation of motive and nor, it seems, was one
expected. The explanation of Irish depravity was
simply that the Irish were depraved by nature; they
killed people because that’s the type of people they
were. This argument, while perfectly circular, was a
surprisingly powerful one in the United States of
the mid-nineteenth century. Irish American violence and depravity, from the labor upheavals and
urban rioting of the antebellum era to the draft riots
of the Civil War and the Orange and Green riots of
1870–1871, were presented as the logical transatlantic outgrowth of an alien immigrant culture. In
the United States, moreover, that culture was
equipped with an international conspiratorial
organization, the Ancient Order of Hibernians,
whose tentacles were said to reach across both the
North American continent and the Atlantic Ocean.
The inherent savagery of the Irish was the guiding
premise in what passed for the first wave of interpretation of the Molly Maguires, a stream of pamphlets, newspaper reports, and histories produced
by contemporaries. Even a somewhat sympathetic
observer like Dewees (The Molly Maguires: The
Origins, Growth, and Character of the Organization, 1877) took the Irish propensity for violence
more or less for granted, while the author of the
other standard contemporary history, Allan Pinkerton—founder of the famous detective agency—took
Irish depravity as his central theme (The Molly
Maguires and the Detectives, 1877). This highly
pejorative and highly conspiratorial perspective,
which constituted the foundational myth of the
Molly Maguires, remained dominant for the next
two generations, resurfacing, for example, in Sir
Arthur Conan Doyle’s novel The Valley of Fear
(1904) and providing a staple of dime novel fiction
until the mid-twentieth century.
By the 1930s, however, the tide had begun to turn.
Anthony Bimba, a Marxist historian, was the first to
offer a major revision (The Molly Maguires, 1932),
placing the Molly Maguire affair firmly in the context of labor and capital. So concerned was Bimba to

overturn the prevailing myth of the Molly Maguires,
however, that he turned it on its head, retaining its
elements of circularity, tautology, and conspiracy
while transferring the burden of evil from Irish
workers to their employers. Evil is not a very useful
category of historical analysis, at least in cases like
this, for it freezes time and character rather than trying to explain causation and motivation. Why did the
employers frame twenty innocent men? Because
they were evil; or, put another way, because they
were capitalist. At the same time, by collapsing all
workers into a single category, Bimba ignored the
class and ethnic diversity among them, a consideration that is now crucial to our understanding.
J. Walter Coleman, in The Molly Maguire Riots:
Industrial Conflict in the Pennsylvania Coal Region
(1936), was the first to open up this line of inquiry.
Despite its apparently pejorative title, Coleman’s
book is among the most sympathetic and convincing
accounts of the subject. The Molly Maguires, he
argued, represented a specifically Irish form of labor
protest, distinct from the British-inspired tradition of
trade unionism in the anthracite region. If this diversity is one of the keys to understanding the Molly
Maguires, another is the inherent unreliability of the
evidence produced by James McParlan. He was,
after all, a trained liar. Both of these points were persuasively made by Coleman but largely ignored in
Wayne G. Broehl’s The Molly Maguires (1964),
which, by the standards of its time, seems curiously
sympathetic to James McParlan, to his employer
Allan Pinkerton, and to the employer of both,
Franklin B. Gowen. A rendition of the subject more
in keeping with the radical ethic of the 1960s can be
found in the film The Molly Maguires (dir. Martin
Ritt 1970) starring Sean Connery as the hero
(alleged Molly ringleader John Kehoe) and Richard
Harris as the anti-hero (turncoat James McParlan).
It is a revealing footnote to U.S. cultural history that
the director, Walter Bernstein, had been blacklisted
in the McCarthy era and in part saw his film as a
response to Elia Kazan, who had notoriously “named
names” in the 1950s, and whose hero in On the
Waterfront informs against his corrupt union bosses.
How, then, is one to make sense of the Molly
Maguires? Clearly, what is needed is an explanation
493

The Molly Maguires

that can break free of the two existing poles of interpretation: the Molly Maguires as depraved killers
and the Molly Maguires as innocent victims of
oppression, whether economic, religious, or ethnic.
The Mollys themselves, being socially marginalized
and largely illiterate, left us virtually no evidence,
which exposes the subject to all manner of conspiracy theories, from both the Right and the Left. We
do, however, have plenty of evidence about them
left by other people: employers, Catholic clergymen,
politicians, newspapermen, pamphleteers, census
takers, government officials, and contemporary historians. Read carefully, these forms of evidence can
yield at least some reliable information about who
the Mollys were. Equally important, they can tell us
a great deal about the aims and motivations of those
who set out to destroy them. In the end, though,
some fundamental historical questions demand at
least a tentative answer: Who were the Molly
Maguires, what did they do, and why?
The starting place in seeking an answer to these
questions is the country where the Molly Maguires
originated. To the historian familiar with Ireland as
well as the United States, the most striking aspect of
the activities in Pennsylvania is how clearly they conformed to a pattern of violent protest evident in the
Irish countryside from the mid-eighteenth century
onward. The Molly Maguires, who emerged toward
the end of the Great Famine (1845–1851), were so
named because their members (invariably young
men) disguised themselves in women’s clothing, used
powder or burnt cork on their faces, and pledged
their allegiance to a mythical woman who symbolized
their struggle against injustice. The American Mollys
were evidently a rare transatlantic outgrowth of this
pattern of Irish rural protest. Contrary to contemporary conspiracy theories, however, it is highly unlikely
that there was any direct continuity of organization
or personnel between Ireland and Pennsylvania.
There is no evidence at all that a conspiratorial
organization was somehow imported into the United
States by Irish immigrants, nor is there any evidence
that individuals convicted in Pennsylvania had been
involved in violent activities in Ireland.
The immigrants did arrive, however, with a cultural memory and established social traditions. Faced
494

with appalling conditions in the mines of Pennsylvania, they responded by deploying a specifically Irish
form of collective violence against their enemies, up
to and including assassination. To that extent, the
American Molly Maguires clearly did exist, even if
they never existed as the full-fledged diabolical
organization depicted by contemporaries. They were
not purely a figment of the conspiratorial imagination; indeed the conspiracy theories about them
could have achieved little credibility if Irish workers
had not been engaged in collective violence of some
sort.
There were two distinct waves of Molly Maguire
activity in Pennsylvania, one in the 1860s and the
other in the 1870s. The first wave, which included
six assassinations, occurred during and directly after
the Civil War. Nobody was convicted of these crimes
at the time, although a mysterious group called the
Molly Maguires was widely believed to be responsible. Only during the trials of the 1870s were the
killings of the previous decade retrospectively traced
to individual members of the Ancient Order of
Hibernians. At the heart of the violence in the 1860s
was a combination of resistance to the military draft
with some form of rudimentary labor organizing by
a shadowy group known variously as the “Committee,” the “Buckshots,” and the “Molly Maguires.”
During the crisis of the Civil War, all forms of labor
organizing were seen as potentially seditious. The
second wave of violence did not occur until 1875, in
part because of the introduction of a more efficient
policing and judicial system, but mainly because of
the emergence of a powerful new trade union, the
Workingmen’s Benevolent Association (WBA),
which united Irish, British, and U.S. workers across
the lines of ethnicity and skill. The labor movement
of the anthracite region now took two distinct but
overlapping forms: a powerful and inclusive trade
union movement, half of whose leaders were Irishborn; and an exclusively Irish and largely unskilled
group of workers called the Molly Maguires. Favoring collective bargaining, strikes, and peaceful
reform, the leaders of the WBA publicly condemned violence, singling out the Molly Maguires
specifically. Yet Franklin B. Gowen repeatedly
insisted that the WBA was simply a cover for the

Monk, Maria

Molly Maguires, who constituted the union’s terrorist arm. Although this claim was manifestly false, it
was highly effective; by collapsing the distinction
between the two organizations Gowen succeeded in
destroying the power of both. Not only was the
union discredited by this strategy, the Molly
Maguires were equipped with an institutional structure they never had. The defeat of one would now
entail the defeat of the other.
To gather information against both arms of the
labor movement, Gowen hired Allan Pinkerton in
October 1873. Pinkerton dispatched James McParlan to the anthracite region. Several other agents
would follow later. Shortly after McParlan fled the
anthracite region, in spring 1875, matters reached a
climax. After a heroic six-month strike against
Gowen and his railroad, the WBA went down to
final defeat. In the disarray that followed, the Molly
Maguires stepped up their activities to a new level:
six of the sixteen assassinations attributed to them
took place in the summer of 1875, even as the leaders of the now-defunct trade union continued to
voice their condemnation. In January 1876 the
arrests began, and that summer the famous trials
commenced. With labor utterly defeated, Franklin
B. Gowen completed his conquest of the local economy, securing full control over production and distribution in the lower anthracite region. This was
the goal the trade union and the Molly Maguires
had long threatened, and it is quite clear that
Gowen had been prepared to take all necessary
means to eliminate that threat.
For almost a century nobody in the Pennsylvania
anthracite region was willing to say much about the
Molly Maguires. The story was too painful, too divisive. Not the least remarkable aspect of this ongoing story, however, has been a dramatic renewal of
interest in the anthracite region itself. Every June
21 for the last six years several hundred people have
arrived in the mining region to commemorate the
Molly Maguires. Descendants of the convicted men
and their alleged victims have sat down together to
eat, drink, and talk. The dominant note of each
year’s gathering has been how to include all sides
and perspectives. This ecumenical spirit, so clearly
lacking in the 1870s, provides the best chance today

of understanding one of the more tragic tales in the
history of U.S. labor.
Kevin Kenny
References
Albright, Charles. 1876. The Great Mollie Maguire
Trials. Commonwealth v. James Carroll et al.,
1876. Arguments of General Charles Albright and
F. W. Hughes for the Commonwealth. Pottsville,
PA: Chronicle Book and Job Rooms.
Aurand, Harold D., and William A. Gudelunas, Jr.
1982. “The Mythical Qualities of Molly Maguire.”
Pennsylvania History 49 (April): 91–103.
Beames, M. R. 1983. Peasants and Power: The
Whiteboy Movements and Their Control in PreFamine Ireland. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Bimba, Anthony. [1932] 1950. The Molly Maguires.
New York: International Publishers.
Broehl, Wayne G., Jr. 1964. The Molly Maguires.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Coleman, James Walter. 1936. The Molly Maguire
Riots: Industrial Conflict in the Pennsylvania
Coal Region. Richmond, VA: Garrett and Massie.
Dewees, Francis P. 1877. The Molly Maguires.
Philadelphia, PA: J. B. Lippincott and Co.
Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan. [1915] 1994. The Valley of
Fear. Edited with an introduction by Owen
Dudley Edwards. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Gowen, Franklin B. 1876. Argument of Franklin B.
Gowen in the Case of the Commonwealth v.
Munley, 1877, for the Murder of Thomas Sanger.
Pottsville, PA: Chronicle Book and Job Rooms.
Kenny, Kevin, 1998. Making Sense of the Molly
Maguires. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pinkerton, Allan. [1877] 1905. The Molly Maguires
and the Detectives. New York: Dillingham.
Wallace, Anthony F. C. 1987. St. Clair: A
Nineteenth-Century Coal Town’s Experience with
a Disaster-Prone Industry. New York: Knopf.
West, R. A. 1876. Report of the Case of the
Commonwealth v. John Kehoe et al., August 8,
1876 . . . Stenographically reported by R. A. West.
Pottsville, PA: Miners’ Journal Book and Job
Rooms.

Monk, Maria
Maria Monk (1816–?1849) was the heroine and putative author of a mostly fictional but wildly popular
book depicting the secret crimes that many Protestants were sure took place behind the closed doors of
495

Monk, Maria

Catholic convents. The book was first published in
1836 under the title The Awful Disclosures of the
Hotel Dieu Nunnery of Montreal. By some estimates,
it was surpassed among antebellum best-sellers only
by the Bible and Uncle Tom’s Cabin, two other
favorites of the northern middle classes and the evangelical Protestant reformers whose causes relied on
them. Awful Disclosures of Maria Monk remains to
this day one of the most influential of all anti-Catholic
texts, illustrating the powerful role that exaggerated
survivor/defector narratives have played in bolstering
conspiracy fears (Billington, 108).
Many facts of Maria Monk’s life are sketchy and
disputed, but it’s generally agreed that she grew up
near Montreal, the wayward daughter of a soldier’s
widow who supported her family by cleaning
houses for the army. Raised as a Protestant, by some
means or another Maria ended up under the care of
Catholic nuns, escaped from their institution, and
left for New York City in 1835, pregnant and in the
company of Rev. William K. Hoyt, an anti-Catholic
activist.
Beyond those basic facts, the accounts differ dramatically. Her mother claimed that Maria had suffered brain damage in a grisly childhood accident
involving a “slate pencil,” and became mentally unstable and sexually uncontrollable as a result.
According to Mrs. Monk, the Catholic institution
from which her daughter escaped was a “Magdalen
asylum” for the redemption of prostitutes, and
William Hoyt had paid Maria to blame her conditions on priests, when Hoyt himself was likely the
guilty party (Billington, 101).
As described in Awful Disclosures, Maria’s own
story was far more inspirational. She told of entering
the Hotel Dieu convent for her education and converting to Catholicism. After a brief stint away from
the convent, including an alleged marriage, Monk
decided to become a nun herself. Upon taking the
veil, she was initiated, if her account is to be
believed, into a nightmare world of psychological
manipulation, sexual exploitation, and mass murder.
Taken aside by the Mother Superior, Maria was
informed that one of a nun’s “great duties was to
obey the priests in all things,” which included servicing them sexually. When Maria virtuously objected,
496

the Superior explained to her that priests needed
nuns for this purpose because they were “not situated like other men, being forbidden to marry.”
Moreover, the Catholic clergy deserved some
release, because they “lived secluded, laborious, selfdenying lives for our salvation.” Finally, Maria was
assured, priests could not sin, and whatever they
wanted was both right and “pleasing in the sight of
God” (Monk, 38).
The sisters at Hotel Dieu also had to assist with
the horrifying measures required to hide the
priests’ activities. When babies were born in the
convent, they were “always baptized, and immediately strangled,” which was actually good for the
children since they would never be tempted to sin
and got to enjoy “everlasting happiness” immediately (Monk, 39). In the Awful Disclosures, Maria
reported her discovery of a pit in the convent cellar
where the little bodies were thrown in and covered
with lime to promote rapid decomposition. The
same fate awaited any nuns who balked at their
duties, or spoke openly of the crimes committed
there. Monk claimed to have witnessed a recalcitrant sister condemned to death, and then summarily executed—in the presence of the bishop—by
means of smothering between two feather mattresses. Priests and nuns jumped on top and trampled her for good measure.
In its original form, the narrative ended with
Maria, pregnant with the child of one “Father Phelan, Priest of the Parish Church of Montreal” (Monk,
177), escaping from the convent and arriving, apparently unaided, at a New York almshouse. Pursued by
agents of the church and deathly ill, she finally
unburdened herself to a hospital chaplain, who gave
her a Bible and introduced her to the joys of Protestantism, depicted as a form of Christianity based
exclusively on the reading of God’s word and “the
free exercise of . . . reason” (Monk, 179).
Monk’s story (if indeed it was hers and not a tale
invented by her promoters) dovetailed nicely with
the accusations that Protestant extremists had been
making in a then-current controversy over the
alleged threat that convents posed to American girls,
which was linked with a much broader anti-Catholic
movement. Awful Disclosures documented the

Monk, Maria

charges much more sensationally than the recent Six
Months in a Convent (1835), the rather mild narrative of “escaped” nun Rebecca Reed, who had been
a sister at the Ursuline convent in Charles Town,
Massachusetts, which anti-Catholic rioters had
burned down in 1834. Awful Disclosures had the
juicy details that Reed’s book lacked, and while it was
not explicit by modern standards, some scholars consider it the first work of pornography published in
the United States, for its frank appeal to prurient
interests.
It is unlikely that Maria Monk actually wrote the
book that bears her name and it is difficult to know
whether she concocted the tales within it, which
became more extensive and detailed in subsequent
editions that boasted numerous invented illustrations and even a floor plan of the convent. In New
York, she fell in with a circle of anti-Catholic activists
including Rev. John Jay Slocum, Arthur Tappan,
Rev. George Bourne, and Theodore Dwight, Jr.
(some of whom were actively involved in other more
worthy evangelical causes such as temperance and
abolitionism). The narrative has been credited to
several different members of the group, but it is certain that they were all heavily involved in publicizing
the ex-nun’s story. The Awful Disclosures first saw
print in an anti-Catholic newspaper; New York’s
leading publisher, Harper Brothers, working
through a dummy corporation named after two of
their employees, finally brought it out as a book in
1836. Immediately popular, it has remained in heavy
circulation ever since.
Unsurprisingly, Maria Monk’s book was controversial as well as widely read. The Protestant religious press promoted it as an absolutely truthful
account of Catholic corruption and superstition, and
Maria herself became a popular figure. At the same
time, Catholics and other opponents of the evangelical activists responded vigorously. Posters denouncing Monk were distributed throughout New York,
and a heavily documented book, Awful Exposure of
the Atrocious Plot Formed by Certain Individuals
against the Clergy and Nuns of Lower Canada, was
published refuting her charges (Billington, 102).
The Democratic and, like its party, generally proCatholic newspaper, the New York Herald, attacked

Awful Disclosures repeatedly as a “gross and atrocious fabrication” (Castagna, 675). Rev. Slocum
rushed out with another book rebutting the refutations, and a public meeting was held in which Monk
and her critics confronted each other.
Inevitably the controversy produced calls for a
public investigation of the Hotel Dieu convent, and
the results of those investigations made it much
more difficult for reasonable people to give Awful
Disclosures any further credence. Catholic officials
denied requests to allow Maria herself to come back
with an investigating committee, but finally did
allow two American Protestant ministers to visit and
inspect the convent. They reported finding nothing
at all that substantiated Monk’s accusations; even the
physical layout of the Hotel Dieu failed to match her
description. Not long after, New York editor and
author William L. Stone conducted an even more
thorough investigation. Combing through the convent almost inch by inch, even sniffing jars in the
basement in search of dead babies, Stone grew to
doubt that Maria Monk had ever lived there at all.
Though he had been active in the anti-Catholic
movement and predisposed to believe Monk’s story,
Stone came away impressed with the cheerfulness
and tranquility of life at the Montreal convent, and
wrote a report aiming to liberate his countrymen
from “the bondage of prejudice” (Franchot, 161)
against these particular Catholics.
The hardcore anti-Catholic press denounced the
investigations (along with another Monk pregnancy)
as Jesuit plots, even suggesting the possibility that the
convent had been rapidly remodeled simply to cast
doubt on Maria Monk’s account. Her public standing
was nevertheless devastated by the investigation, and
in 1837 she left New York and mostly dropped from
view, her mental condition evidently deteriorating.
She saw only a tiny fraction of the profits from her
best-selling book, despite some lawsuits, and seemed
to have drifted into petty crime, poverty, and possibly
prostitution. Most accounts have her arrested for
stealing from a customer at the Five Points brothel
where she probably worked toward the end of her
life, and then dying in jail on Riker’s Island in 1849.
Her Awful Disclosures lived on, and on.
Jeffrey L. Pasley

497

Monroe, Marilyn

See also: Anti-Catholicism.
References
American National Biography.
Billington, Ray Allen. 1964. The Protestant Crusade,
1800–1860: A Study of the Origins of American
Nativism. Chicago, IL: Quadrangle Books.
Castagna, JoAnn. 1999. “Monk, Maria.” In American
National Biography, ed. John A. Garraty and
Mark C. Carnes. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Early Canadiana Online: http://www.canadiana.
org/english/. Features several editions of the
Awful Disclosures.
Franchot, Jenny. 1994. Roads to Rome: The
Antebellum Protestant Encounter with
Catholicism. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Monk, Maria. 1836. Awful Disclosures of Maria
Monk, or, The Hidden Secrets of a Nun’s Life in a
Convent Exposed. Manchester: Milner.

Monroe, Marilyn
Marilyn Monroe, born Norma Jeane Baker-Mortensen in Los Angeles on 1 June 1926, died during the
night of 4 August 1962 in Brentwood, California. The
Los Angeles County coroner ruled that her death was
due to “acute barbiturate poisoning due to ingestion
of overdose . . . a probable suicide.” Despite official
reassurances that Monroe had killed herself, her
death sparked a host of conspiracy theories claiming
that the Mafia, Communists, the CIA, John and
Robert Kennedy, her doctor, or her housekeeper had
murdered her.
First spotted in an airplane factory, Monroe
quickly became a famous cover girl, displaying her
sex appeal in dozens of magazines, including Playboy. Her career as an actress took off with The
Asphalt Jungle (1950), followed by All about Eve
(1950), We’re Not Married! (1952), Niagara (1953),
Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (1953), How to Marry a
Millionaire (1953), River of No Return (1954), The
Seven-Year Itch (1955), Some Like it Hot (1959),
and The Misfits (1961), among others.
Despite her acting success, the official theory
goes, Monroe was a troubled individual, with three
failed marriages, the first to sailor James Dougherty,
the second to baseball star Joe DiMaggio, and the
498

third to playwright Arthur Miller, and with two miscarriages while married to Miller. There were also
rumors that she had an abortion shortly before killing
herself, and that she suffered from schizophrenia.
Her attempts to escape her “dumb blonde” image
failed when she was fired for chronic lateness from
her leading role in George Cukor’s Something’s Got
to Give.
From 1955 on, Monroe started analytic sessions,
first with Dr. Margaret Hohenberg, then with Dr.
Marianne Kris, and finally with Dr. Ralph Greenson,
all of whom pushed her into excessive introspection,
then prescribed barbiturates to reduce her stress
levels. Desperately switching from one lover to the
next, including actors Yves Montand, Marlon
Brando, and Frank Sinatra, and director Elia Kazan,
and addicted to barbiturates that she took along with
alcohol, she was still reeling from a difficult childhood spent in foster homes. On at least two previous
occasions, she threatened to kill herself, first by
throwing herself out of the window (1961), then by
overdose (1962). On 4 August 1962, an extremely
irritable Monroe bitterly complained that her publicist, Pat Newcomb, had slept through the night
while Monroe had not; Monroe then spent most of
the day making frantic calls to acquaintances, then
took (accidentally or, more likely, willingly) twentyfive pills of Nembutal that, combined with chloral
hydrate, provoked a fatal overdose.
Odd events surrounding her death immediately
sparked conspiracy theories. She was found lying
naked on her bed, her hand clutched on the telephone, as if she had tried to call somebody as she lay
dying (she usually put her phone back on the couch,
under a pillow, when she went to sleep). A list of
phone calls she placed that night was mysteriously
clipped from her bill. Key samples from her autopsy
disappeared. The diary she kept, along with handwritten notes from Robert Kennedy, were never
found, suggesting that she had been murdered
because she “knew too much” and that her assassins
had conscientiously removed all incriminating evidence. Monroe lay flat on her bed with her legs
stretched, an odd position for someone dying from
an overdose, which suggests that the death scene
was staged.

Monroe, Marilyn

Close friends who talked to or met Monroe in the
days before she died described her as happy, not
depressed, and for many the official suicide theory
was therefore implausible. A winner of the female
World Film Favorite award at the 1962 Golden
Globes ceremony and a world-renowned actress
with thirty films to her credit, Monroe had nothing
to fear about her career—although she had been
fired, Twentieth Century Fox was negotiating Monroe’s return to the set of Something’s Got to Give.
The image of a beautiful movie star, lying naked on
silk sheets and struck dead in the prime of life
immediately caught the public imagination and
helped propagate conspiracy theories.
The exact chronology of her death remains in
doubt. Officially, Monroe, who had been invited to
actor Peter Lawford’s beach house that night, retired
to her bedroom around 8 P.M. instead. Eunice Murray, her housekeeper, woke up around 3:30 A.M. early
on 5 August, noticed light in Monroe’s room, stepped
in, found her in an odd position, and called her psychiatrist, Dr. Ralph Greenson, who asked Dr. Hyman
Engelberg to come. Engelberg pronounced Monroe
dead and, at 4:25 A.M., he called West Los Angeles
Police Department Sergeant Jack Clemmons to
notify the police of Monroe’s demise. This chronology
only appeared in later sworn testimonies by Greenson
and Engelberg. According to Clemmons, when he
arrived on the scene Murray, Greenson, and Engelberg told him that Murray had found Monroe’s body
around midnight. Monroe intimates such as Lawford
claim they were notified of her death before 3:30 A.M.
Ambulance drivers who took Monroe’s body away
claim she was already in a stage of rigor mortis and
must have died around midnight. Should this alternative chronology be true, conspiracy theorists say, several hours elapsed between Monroe’s death and the
arrival of the police, leaving plenty of time for murderers to remove evidence and to leave the scene.
One theory, put forward by Donald H. Wolfe in
his The Last Days of Marilyn Monroe, argues that
U.S. president John F. Kennedy and his brother
Robert both had affairs with Monroe. As a result, she
knew intimate details about both brothers and about
their family’s connections to the Mafia and, given
Monroe’s history of mental illness, she might reveal

embarrassing details to the media. Since Monroe
was by then a world-famous actress, a tell-all interview would trigger a scandal able to shatter
Kennedy’s presidency. When Monroe sang a sensuous “Happy Birthday” to the president in May 1962,
Wolfe argues that Kennedy feared she was on the
verge of going public about their affair and so had
her killed. Robert Slatzer, in his The Curious Death
of Marilyn Monroe, specifically blamed Robert
Kennedy, who allegedly used CIA operatives to carry
out the murder.
Monroe’s romantic involvement with John F.
Kennedy is well documented, and rumors that she
started a relationship with Robert after John
“dumped” her on his brother seem entirely plausible. Evidence directly implicating any of the
Kennedys in Monroe’s alleged murder, however, is
scarce. One lone coincidence in favor of this theory
is that actor Peter Lawford, who had married
Kennedy’s sister Patricia Kennedy-Lawford, was the
last person to talk to Marilyn before she died. However unsubstantiated, the Kennedy theory remains
the most popular among conspiracy enthusiasts.
Another theory, put forward by Chuck Giancana
in Double Cross: The Explosive, Inside Story of the
Mobster Who Controlled America, suggests that
Chuck’s older brother, mobster Sam Giancana,
ordered Marilyn killed in order to punish Robert
Kennedy for prosecuting Mafia leaders during his
tenure as attorney general. Giancana hoped Marilyn’s murder would be attributed to Kennedy, but
Kennedy managed to remove incriminating evidence
before Los Angeles police officials reached the crime
scene.
Less believable theories abound. Frank Capell, in
The Strange Death of Marilyn Monroe, blamed her
death on a Communist conspiracy intent on sapping
U.S. morale. Other theories involve Monroe’s psychiatrist, Ralph Greenson, accused of giving her a
lethal injection of barbiturates (either willingly, or by
mistakenly pumping the drugs into her heart); her
housekeeper, Eunice Murray, who might have killed
Monroe on Greenson’s orders; and even her publicist, Pat Newcomb, who spent the night of the death
in Monroe’s home.
Philippe R. Girard

499

Moon Landings

See also: Kennedy, John F., Assassination of;
Kennedy, Robert F., Assassination of; Mafia.
References
Capell, Frank. 1964. The Strange Death of Marilyn
Monroe. Staten Island, NY: Herald of Freedom.
Giancana, Chuck. 1992. Double Cross: The
Explosive, Inside Story of the Mobster Who
Controlled America. New York: Warner Books.
Leaming, Barbara. 1998. Marilyn Monroe. New
York: Crown Publishers.
Slatzer, Robert. 1974. The Curious Death of Marilyn
Monroe. New York: Pinnacle Books.
Wolfe, Donald H. 1998. The Last Days of Marilyn
Monroe. New York: Morrow.

Moon Landings
Project Apollo sent six two-man teams of astronauts
to the surface of the moon between July 1969 and
December 1972. Roughly 10–20 percent of Americans now believe, however, that no human has ever
set foot on the moon, and that all evidence for the
landings is part of an elaborate hoax staged by the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA). Skepticism about the landings began to
surface almost as soon as they took place and has
remained steady for three decades since. Supporters of the hoax theory argue that careful scrutiny of
still pictures, films, and radio transmissions reveals
telltale signs of the deception. Critics of the hoax
theory dismiss the idea of a thirty-year-long conspiracy involving hundreds or thousands of people
as patently absurd. The “anomalies” in lunar photographs are, they contend, products not of a shadowy
conspiracy but of the will to believe in one.
Origins and Context
Belief that the moon missions were faked entails
belief in two separate premises. The first is that it
was possible, in 1969, to simulate a lunar landing
and the “moonwalks” that accompanied it. The second is that the U.S. government deceived the public about one of the defining events of the century.
Between 1968 and 1973, events outside the space
program rendered both premises more plausible, to
far more people, than they would have been a
decade earlier.
500

Stanley Kubrick’s film 2001: A Space Odyssey
(1968) signaled a revolution in movie special effects
and, specifically, in the simulation of space travel on
screen. John Sturges’s Marooned (1969) and Douglas Trumbull’s Silent Running (1971) showed that
2001 was more than a brilliant fluke. All three films
stood as far beyond Destination Moon (1950) as that
film, revolutionary in its time, had stood beyond the
crude Flash Gordon serials of the 1930s. The new
films’ extraordinarily realistic “look” made it easy to
believe that the simulated space flight could now be
passed off as real.
The five years between 1968 and 1973 also saw
the rapid erosion of the U.S. public’s trust in the federal government. The optimistic pronouncements of
politicians and generals about the war in Vietnam
were repeatedly undercut by the testimony of journalists and returning veterans. The 1970 publication
of the Pentagon Papers—the government’s own
“secret history” of the war—damaged government
credibility further, as did the 1970 revelation of a
secret bombing campaign against Cambodia. The
Watergate Scandal of 1973–1974 destroyed the
Nixon administration and further damaged the federal government’s credibility. The knowledge that
the president and his advisors had systematically
abused the power of their offices for political gain,
then systematically lied about their actions, permanently soured many Americans’ attitudes toward
their elected officials.
The idea of a trip to the moon had, as late as the
late 1950s, seemed to many Americans a distant
dream at best. Many continued, in the early 1970s,
to find the idea implausible. Disbelief in the moon
landings coalesced around those doubts. A poll
taken by Knight Newspapers in July 1970, a year
after the first landing, revealed that 30 percent of
those polled doubted the landings had been real.
Doubts ran especially high where trust in the federal government was especially low. In poor, black
neighborhoods of Washington, D.C., half of those
polled believed that the landings had been a hoax
(Van Bakel).
Cynicism about the government diminished little
after the early 1970s. The healing effects of time and
fading memories were repeatedly offset by fresh

Moon Landings

scandals. Americans born since the mid-1960s thus
have only vague, secondhand memories of the
Apollo missions but vivid memories of government
duplicity. “I’d always suspected something like that”
is a common reaction among high school and college
students encountering the hoax theory for the first
time.
The Community of Believers
The hoax theory, even according to its critics, is
accepted by tens of millions of Americans. It has
been shaped and promoted, however, by a much
smaller group of core believers. The members of
this core group are responsible for collecting, analyzing, and publishing what they see as compelling
evidence of government deception with respect to
Project Apollo. They agree on what constitutes this
body of evidence, on how the individual pieces of
evidence should be interpreted, and on the idea
that the public record of the moon landings was falsified. They disagree about the extent of, and the
reasons for, that falsification.
Some hoax theorists, like William Brian, argue
that U.S. astronauts did land on the moon in
1969–1972, but that they discovered evidence of an
alien civilization that has been ruthlessly suppressed. Other theorists, like David Percy, argue
that the landings broadcast on television to worldwide audiences of millions were fakes. The real
moon landings, they believe, were carried out in
total secrecy by a shadowy “black space program,”
and that there is no public record of it or them. The
most popular view—narrowly believed among dedicated hoax theorists and widely among rank-andfile believers—is that humans never went to the
moon at all. NASA faked the landings, according to
this view, because it was incapable of actually carrying them out by the end of the 1960s, as President
Kennedy had challenged them to do in 1961.
The leading advocate of this “mainstream” version of the hoax theory is Bill Kaysing, who has been
promoting it since the early 1970s. Ralph René’s
book NASA Mooned America (1994), James Collier’s video Was It Only a Paper Moon? (1997), and
Bart Sibrel’s video A Funny Thing Happened on the
Way to the Moon (2001) stake out positions similar

to Kaysing’s, while offering similar arguments and
evidence.
Kaysing’s forthrightly titled book We Never
Landed on the Moon (1974) was the first extended
discussion of the hoax theory to appear in print. It
remains in print at this writing, having been
expanded and republished several times, and
spawned a series of videos that present its argument
visually. Kaysing’s ideas were also featured prominently in the Hollywood suspense film Capricorn
One (1978)—the story of NASA’s attempt to fake the
first manned landing on Mars. Except for the change
of destination, the film’s fictional scenario is virtually
identical to Kaysing’s purportedly real one. Even the
spaceships are identical to those used in Project
Apollo. Kaysing has actively promoted the hoax theory on radio talk-shows and, in 1997, achieved fleeting fame by suing ex-Apollo astronaut James Lovell
for referring to him as “a wacko” (a judge dismissed
the suit as baseless). The Fox television network’s
hour-long documentary Conspiracy Theory: Did We
Go to the Moon? (2001) gave Kaysing’s ideas a thorough, and thoroughly uncritical, airing.
The Case for the Hoax Theory
The mainstream version of the hoax theory is built
around three central ideas. The first is that NASA,
incapable of actually sending anyone to the moon,
never allowed the Apollo astronauts to go beyond
the Earth’s orbit. The second is that official NASA
photographs and films from the Apollo missions
show telltale signs of their creation on an earthbound sound stage. The third is that NASA, and its
coconspirators elsewhere in the government, have
kept those with knowledge of the conspiracy quiet
for thirty years. The rest of the hoax theory consists
of a web of suppositions and “likely stories” connecting those three ideas.
Proof of NASA’s inability to carry off a real lunar
landing lies, believers argue, in the contrast between
the space agency’s performance before and during
the Apollo missions. NASA’s early attempts at space
flight in the late 1950s and early 1960s were often
spectacular failures. They achieved a measure of
success with Earth-orbiting flights during the Mercury and Gemini programs, but Apollo was plagued
501

Moon Landings

by problems with quality control, with meeting
deadlines, and with spacecraft performance. As late
as January 1967, three astronauts died on the launch
pad when fire broke out in the cabin of a poorly
designed Apollo spacecraft during a test. Yet, beginning with the flight of Apollo 8 around the moon in
December 1968, mission followed flawless mission
with only one (nonlethal) failure—Apollo 13. Hoax
theorists argue that real, successful lunar missions
are far less plausible than faked ones in which
(according to one scenario) empty Apollo spacecraft
were launched and then “parked” in Earth orbit for
the required number of days before being returned
to Earth under remote control.
Proof that the moon landings were staged on
Earth rests, according to believers, on clearly visible
“anomalies.” Why, they ask, is the “moon rock”
shown in one NASA photo marked with the letter
“C”? Why is the soil beneath the engine nozzle of
the lunar module only slightly disturbed? An engine
so powerful should have blasted out a crater deep
enough to be noticeable. Why do photographs supposedly taken on the lunar surface show objects lit
from more than one direction? There should be
only one source of light on the moon: the sun. Why
are the stars not visible in the lunar sky? With no
atmosphere to obscure them, they should shine
clearly. Why, in film footage that shows an astronaut
planting the U.S. flag, does the flag appear to wave
as if in a breeze? It should, on the airless lunar surface, hang limply from the rod that supports its top
edge.
Proof of a post-Apollo conspiracy of silence lies,
believers argue, in the fact that no one connected to
NASA has spoken out on the subject. They see it as
particularly significant that Neil Armstrong, commander of Apollo 11 and the first person to set foot
on the moon, declines to give interviews and that
other astronauts have specifically refused interviews with hoax theorists. Some (including Bill
Kaysing) go further, suggesting that the three astronauts who died in the mid-1960s plane crashes, the
three who died in the 1967 Apollo cabin fire, and
the seven who died in the 1986 Challenger disaster
were murdered by NASA to keep them quiet.

502

The Case against a Hoax
The hoax theory, according to its critics, is a tissue of
faulty assumptions, specious “evidence,” and bad science. The Apollo flights to the moon, though successful, were far from the flawless exercises that
Kaysing and others suggest. Apollo 11, the first to
land, came within seconds of crashing on the lunar
surface. The explosion that crippled Apollo 13, and
many of the problems that resulted, were products of
flawed or inefficient design—the same kinds of problems that NASA had faced throughout the 1960s.
The purported “anomalies” on which believers
rely so heavily are, in fact, readily explained without
a hoax. The “C” appears only in a single copy of the
photograph in question, not on the original film.
The lunar module’s rocket engine fires only briefly
when the ship is close to the lunar surface, and not
at all for the last seconds of the descent. The shallow craters it leaves in the lunar soil reflect this.
The rays of the sun illuminate objects on the lunar
surface directly, but also by reflecting off the soil,
the lunar module, and other light-colored objects.
The stars are not visible in the dark lunar sky for the
same reason they are not visible to observers standing near a bright street light: the street light (or, in
lunar photography, the sun) overwhelms them. The
flag moves after its pole is planted not because of
breeze but because of inertia. The act of driving the
pole into the ground shakes the cloth and, for a
moment or two, it continues to shake.
No present or former NASA employee has
“blown the whistle” on the hoax, critics argue, because there was no hoax. It defies belief that the
hundreds or thousands of NASA employees who
would have been aware of some part of the hoax
would all have kept silence for three decades. It is,
on the other hand, far from surprising that astronauts would refuse to talk to hoax theorists who
accuse them of being brainwashed dupes at best and
bald-faced liars at worst. Neil Armstrong’s reticence
about the first lunar landing mirrors his similar reticence about his combat missions in the Korean War
and his test flights of the X-15 rocket plane. Buzz
Aldrin and Michael Collins, who flew with him
aboard Apollo 11, have both written extensively

Moonies

about their experiences on the moon. Unless the
existence of a hoax is assumed, critics point out,
nothing about the death of six astronauts in the mid1960s or seven aboard Challenger suggests foul play.
Space travel is, as even hoax theorists readily admit,
a dangerous business.
A. Bowdoin Van Riper
See Also: Area 51; Cambodia, Secret Bombing of;
Pentagon Papers; UFOs; Watergate.
References
Brian, William. 1982. Moongate. Portland, OR:
Future Science Research Publishing.
Chaikin, Andrew. 1994. Man on the Moon. New
York: Viking Penguin.
Kaysing, Bill, and Randy Reid. 1976. We Never
Went to the Moon. Pomeroy, WA: Health
Research Press.
Percy, David, and Mary Bennett. 2001. Dark Moon.
Kempton, IL: Adventures Unlimited Press.
Plait, Phil. 2001. “Fox TV and the Apollo Moon
Hoax.” Phil Plait’s Bad Astronomy, 13 February.
http://www.badastronomy.com/bad/tv/foxapollo.
html.
Van Bakel, Rogier. 1994. “The Wrong Stuff.” Wired,
2 September. http://www.wired.com/wired/
archive/2.09/moon.land_pr.html.

Moonies
The Unification Church (known popularly as “the
Moonies,” after its founder, Rev. Moon) is viewed
with suspicion by the conspiracy-minded for three
reasons: its links with the South Korean government and CIA, its legion front organizations, and its
recruitment and indoctrination practices, the latter
of which have consistently drawn charges of “brainwashing” and “mind control.” Known officially as
the Holy Spirit Association for the Unification of
World Christianity (HSA-UCW), the Unification
Church was founded in Seoul, Korea, on 1 May
1954. It spread through Korea over the course of
the 1950s, was transplanted to Japan in 1958, and
moved to the United States in 1959. While the
reach of the Unification Church would ultimately
be global, these three nations remain its strongholds. The Church was relatively obscure in the

United States until the early 1970s when it made its
entry onto the political scene.
Anticommunism has always been an official part of
Unification theology (the key text of which is Moon’s
Divine Principle), which views communism as the
legacy of Cain, who in turn is understood as the fruit
of Eve’s coupling with Satan. According to this view,
democracy is the legacy of Abel, who symbolizes
humanity’s relationship with God. Thus the struggle
between communism and democracy is seen as no
less than the struggle between the forces of God and
the legions of Satan. Moonie theology asserts that
those who support the HSA-UCW or reside within
its fold are on the side of God; all others serve Satan.
More cynical interpretations suggest that Moon’s
anticommunist politics were merely a ruse that
allowed for the cultivation of powerful allies. The
Unification Church’s first public and official foray
into anticommunist activism—which was to continue
throughout the following two decades—was with the
founding of the Freedom Leadership Foundation
(FLF) in the summer of 1969. The FLF, synchronizing its activities with the Student Coordinating Committee for Peace with Freedom, organized a threeday fast in favor of the war in Vietnam, attracting
broad media attention (Mickler). The FLF was to be
the first of many affiliated groups that would later
include the International Federation for Victory over
Communism, the Committee for Responsible Dialogue, American Youth for a Just Peace, the One
World Crusade, and the Council for Unified Research and Education. These varied groups were tied
together by “interlocking boards of directors, personnel, and secret funding” (Baldwin, 167). Critics of
Moon assert that these satellite groups were used to
pursue Moon’s political agenda(s) without endangering the tax-free status of the Unification Church.
One anticult website (www.trancenet.org) currently
lists over 1,000 associated organizations or “front
groups” internationally. One Moon media outlet that
has drawn much attention is the District of Columbia–based Washington Times (whose parent company, News World Communications Inc., bought out
the failing media organization UPI in 2000). In the
founder’s address presented on the occasion of the

503

Moonies

paper’s fifteenth anniversary, entitled “True Family
and True Universe Centering on True Love,” Moon
claimed among other things that all of the material
that Radio Free Europe uses comes from the Washington Times; that he brought about the election of
both Ronald Reagan and George Bush, Sr; and that
the newspaper played a central role in the collapse of
world communism. Clearly such claims are debatable, but as support for assertions regarding the
paper’s influence it should be noted that former
President Bush, speaking at the launch party for
Tiempos del Mundo (a Moon newspaper distributed
throughout South America), commented on the
Washington Times as “a paper that in my view brings
sanity to Washington, D.C.” (Reuters). Bush was
allegedly paid an honorarium of $10,000 for his
speech.
Following the public protests of the FLF in 1969,
the next entrée into politics to capture widespread
media attention was the Unification Church’s show
of support for the beleaguered post-Watergate
Richard Nixon. Beginning 30 November 1973, the
Unification Church ran Moon’s “Answer to Watergate” as a full page ad in each of the twenty-one
cities included in the itinerary of Moon’s Day of
Hope tour. The statement, asserting that “the crisis
for America is a crisis for God” and calling for the
United States to “Forgive, Love and Unite,” was
ultimately to appear in one paper in every state save
Hawaii. The statement was coupled with the formation of the National Prayer and Fast for the
Watergate Crisis and Committee (NPFWC), which
“organized vigils, rallies, letter-writing, and leafletting in all fifty states” (Mickler, 205). On 22–24 July
of the following year the NPFWC organized a 610member, three-day fast on the Capitol steps in
Washington, D.C. The fast received massive publicity. Moon quickly followed up on the Church’s
increasing notoriety by embarking on another “Day
of Hope” tour.
The Unification Church’s use of questionable
recruitment and indoctrination practices constitutes
a second area of concern for conspiracy theorists.
These activities helped to raise the profile of the
Unification Church dramatically, one result of which
was increased criticism. Aside from the theological
504

and spiritual critiques launched by Christian organizations, some of the first elements of Unification
practice to come under fire were its recruitment and
indoctrination practices—inevitably referred to as
“brainwashing” by its opponents. It was the fear of
mind control associated with the Unification Church
(as well as the International Society of Krishna Consciousness) that gave rise to the practice of the
abduction and “de-programming” of cult members.
The Unification Church and its deprogrammer döppelgangers created the impression that U.S. youth in
the early 1970s were increasingly subject to seduction and virtual enslavement by cult organizations.
In terms of recruitment, the Church has historically
employed deceptive means, with potential recruits
remaining unaware of the identity of their recruiters
until several steps along in the process. The process
of indoctrination pursued by the Unification Church
does include elements of “mind control,” but no
more so than other “total institutions” such as the
military or Christian convents and monasteries,
which are usually above suspicion. Deprivation
(minimal sleep and diet), a constant focus on theology, the renunciation of material wealth, isolation
from the larger society, and the use of chanting are
some of the elements of indoctrination that have
drawn criticism.
In addition to charges of “mind control,” the Unification Church has drawn fire for its ongoing ties to
South Korea and its continual denial of those links.
In keeping with the Church’s anticommunist theology and its origins in Korea, Moon’s teachings hold
that the line separating North and South Korea is of
tremendous world-historical importance: it constitutes nothing less than ground zero in the eternal
battle between God and Satan. The clearest evidence of ties, if not active collaboration, with the
South Korean government and the Korean Central
Intelligence Agency (KCIA) concerns Moon’s connection with the Republic of South Korea under
Park Chung Hee in the early 1970s. One researcher
into these activities notes that during the Church’s
active support of the beleaguered President Nixon
stateside, it was also holding massive demonstrations
in Seoul at a time when such rallies had been
banned by emergency decree; Moon also operated

Morgan, John Pierpont

“an anticommunist indoctrination center for Korean
government employees and military” (Lee, 129)
within Korea, an activity that fell directly under the
control of the KCIA. Pak Bo Hi, Moon’s translator
and chief aide throughout the 1970s, was retired
from service in the Korean military and had served
as assistant military attaché to Washington prior to
establishing the Korean Cultural and Freedom
Foundation—one of the Church’s many political
front organizations. The title of military attaché generally implies some role in intelligence work.
Through the KCFF, the Unification Church had
access to both the South Korean embassy’s diplomatic pouch and cable channel to Seoul, which “only
goes to the foreign minister, director of the KCIA,
prime minister, and the president” (Lee, 130). Pak
Bo Hi is also president of New World Communications, which owns the Washington Times and the
UPI, as well as heading up the Confederation of the
Associations for Unity of the Societies of the Americas (CAUSA), a primary political arm of the Church.
According to a Fairness and Accuracy in Media
report, “CAUSA was instrumental in providing aid
to the Nicaraguan contras” (Clarkson). The controversy over links between Moon’s organization and
both North and South Korea is ongoing.
Mark Harrison
See also: Anticommunism; Central Intelligence
Agency; Mind Control.
References
Baldwin, Frank. 1978. “The Korea Lobby.” Pp.
160–175 in Science, Sin, and Scholarship: The
Politics of Reverend Moon and the Unification
Church, ed. Irving Louis Horowitz. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Clarkson, Fred. 1987. “Behind the Times: Who Pulls
the Strings at Washington’s No. 2 Daily?”
http://www.fair.org/extra/best-of-extra/washingtontimes.html.
Mickler, Michael L. 1993. A History of the
Unification Church in America 1959–1974. New
York: Garland Publishing.
Lee, Jai Hyon. 1978. “The Activities of the Korean
Central Intelligence Agency in the United
States.” Pp. 120–147 in Science, Sin, and
Scholarship: The Politics of Reverend Moon and
the Unification Church, ed. Irving Louis
Horowitz. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Morgan, John Pierpont
Easily the most powerful financial figure in the nineteenth-century United States was John Pierpont
Morgan. His role in the creation of the Federal
Reserve System, as well as his familiarity with other
figures alleged to have been involved in conspiracies, including John D. Rockefeller, put Morgan at
the center of financial controversies. Populists, in
particular, criticized his role in rescuing the United
States Treasury in February 1895 when he and President Grover Cleveland struck a deal to provide gold
to the government at a profit rate of 7 percent. More
recently, conspiracy theorist Sherman Skolnick has
contended that J. P. Morgan and Co., the firm
founded by Morgan, “with the parent holding companies of 18 money center banks” have been
involved in artificially forcing up oil prices.
Both the Populists and modern conspiracy theorists and others have maintained that Morgan is a
part of a vast network in league with, or controlled
by (depending on the source), John D. Rockefeller.
The Populists went even further, claiming that
Morgan was an agent of the “House of Rothschild”
who was intent on oppressing the “common man.”
More modern theorists, in contrast, link Morgan to
the British monarchy and its involvement in the two
world wars, and Skolnick went so far as to claim that
J. P. Morgan & Co. was part of a scheme with the
British government to control the year 2000 presidential elections.
J. P. Morgan was born on 17 April 1837 in Hartford, Connecticut, to a mercantile family. Junius
Morgan, J. P.’s father, dealt in foreign exchange and
became a merchant banker, and could afford to send
his son to school in Europe. The family moved to
England, and after J. P. worked for his father’s banking house in London, he returned to the United
States in 1857 to establish J. P. Morgan & Co. in
1860 through a connection to the expired George
Peabody & Co. He served as an agent for his father’s
firm, and engaged in foreign exchange and gold
speculation.
Morgan’s business flourished with the expansion
of the railroads, a number of which were in financial trouble by the late 1860s. Morgan formed syndicates that acquired troubled railroads, such as the
505

Morgan, John Pierpont

J. P. Morgan. (Library of Congress)

Albany & Susquehanna Railroad, imposing new
“managerial hierarchies” on railroads that still had
not adopted that managerial form. In this way, Morgan refashioned the railroads into the image of
banks. He also reconstructed his firm in 1871 with
a merger with a family friend, Anthony J. Drexel, as
Drexel, Morgan & Company, which was reorganized again in 1895 as J. P. Morgan & Company. By
that time, Morgan had formed numerous syndicates
to take over troubled railroads and put them on
sound managerial and financial footing. Several
Jewish financial houses, such as Levi P. Morton and
Seligman Brothers, as well as the European financier August Belmont, participated in these syndicates, fueling the allegations of “foreign influence”
or “Jewish control.”
Morgan also got in the habit of bailing out the
United States government in times of need, as in
506

1871 when he financed the army payroll with no
guarantee of repayment after Congress adjourned
without passing an appropriation bill. Drexel, Morgan & Company also refinanced the U.S. debt in
1877. Through his social contacts, especially his
trips to Europe where he was on the same vessel as
William H. Vanderbilt, who owned a substantial
interest in the New York Central Railroad, Morgan
expanded his empire. Not only did Morgan acquire
critical information from magnates such as Vanderbilt and Rockefeller, but each time he sold securities for their firms, Drexel, Morgan & Company
made healthy profits. As the primary historian of
railroads in the United States, Albro Martin, has
noted, “No banking firm in America, publicly chartered or private, had a bigger stake in the smooth
operation of the American railroad system than
Drexel, Morgan” (Martin, 333).
After the Populists succeeded in pressuring Congress to pass the Sherman Silver Purchase Act,
which artificially overvalued silver to gold, the
nation’s gold stocks plummeted and its banking system plunged into a panic. In stepped Morgan, who,
with a syndicate involving Belmont and the Rothschilds, essentially prevented the bankruptcy and
collapse of the U.S. government. President Grover
Cleveland had to swallow his (and the nation’s) pride
and accept the bailout, but the populist press crucified both him and Morgan as betraying the “working
man.” Ultimately, the criticism of Morgan was irrelevant: in the 1896 election, William McKinley, running on a monometallic gold standard platform,
defeated William Jennings Bryan, the Democratic
candidate who had also enjoyed the endorsement of
the Populist Party for his support of “free and unlimited coinage of silver at 16:1.”
McKinley’s election substantially ended all
debate about a bimetallic standard, but not all questions about the U.S. banking system. Already a
number of commissions and panels, most of them
formed by bankers, had made recommendations to
strengthen the nation’s financial system. Their recommendations were not directed at Morgan, but
rather at the necessity to have Morgan repeatedly
step in to rescue the Treasury. After the panic of
1907, Morgan himself made clear that the country’s

Morgan, William

financial needs had grown so extensive that, even
with a syndicate, he could not possibly save the
country a third time. Following a secret meeting on
Jekyll Island, Georgia, attended by Paul Warburg,
Frank Vanderlip, Nelson Aldrich, and a few others,
a new banking plan was presented to Congress that
in its essentials was the Federal Reserve System.
Morgan had not been present at the deliberations,
nor had he participated in any meaningful way in the
actual drafting of the bill, yet he was almost entirely
responsible for the legislation. In late 1912 and early
1913, the House of Representatives formed a select
committee under Representative Arsene P. Pujo of
Louisiana to investigate the “money trust,” with Morgan under Pujo’s scrutiny. The committee sent out
questionnaires to 30,000 banks and trust companies,
and took testimony from prominent financiers such
as George F. Baker and Morgan, and when the
smoke cleared, the committee claimed to have found
evidence of extreme concentration of the nation’s
money in the holdings by New York banks, via consolidations, stock investments, and securities arrangements. Morgan, the committee asserted, had
control of 10 percent of the nation’s wealth and controlled 43 percent of the nation’s money. (It is worth
noting that the Rockefeller conspiracy theorists
maintain that Morgan was a “puppet” of the Rockefeller interests.) The Pujo Committee’s report helped
the drafters of the Federal Reserve bill diversify
power among twelve regional banks, many of them
in the West and South—well outside of New York’s
influence (they thought).
Meanwhile, between the two panics (1893 and
1907), Morgan had continued his acquisition and
reorganization of railroads and then, in 1900, struck
a famous deal with steel titan Andrew Carnegie to
purchase Carnegie Steel company for $480 million.
Morgan subsequently reorganized it as United
States Steel, the world’s first billion-dollar company,
and turned it over to Elbert H. Gary to run.
J. P. Morgan died in March 1913, before the
Federal Reserve System became operational, but
with him passed an era of “finance capitalism” that
remained submerged until the arrival of Michael
Milken in the 1970s. Morgan’s son, J. P. Morgan, Jr.,
took over the management of the company and

continued to arrange financing for numerous countries, but never became the target of vitriol that his
father engendered.
Larry Schweikart
See also: Federal Reserve System; Gold Standard.
Rockefeller Family.
References
Carosso, Vincent P. 1987. The Morgans: Private
International Bankers, 1854–1913. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Martin, Albro. “John Pierpont Morgan.” Pp.
325–351 in Encyclopedia of American Business
History and Biography: Banking and Finance to
1913, ed. Larry Schweikart. New York. Facts on
File.
Websites
Push Hamburger: http://www.pushhamburger.com/
morenews12.htm.
Sherman Skolnick Report: http://www.
skolnicksreport.com/boterrorists.html.
Tetrahedron (Dr. Len Horowitz): http://www.
tetrahedron.org/news/jewish_hate.html.

Morgan, William
The abduction and suspected murder of William
Morgan in western New York State in 1826 ignited
a controversy that fed conspiracy thinking about the
Freemasons and created a national anti-Masonic
movement. Morgan, born in Virginia in 1774, was
originally a stonemason, but worked at several
trades. In the early 1820s, he moved from Ontario,
Canada, to upstate New York, settling in Rochester
and then in Batavia, and resuming masonry. Soon
afterward, he sought admission to a Masonic lodge
in nearby LeRoy. Morgan was initiated into the
lodge, but when he supported the formation of a
new lodge in Batavia, other members of the proposed lodge took his name off the petition, thus
denying him membership. Morgan retaliated by
entering into a contract with local printer David C.
Miller to publish an exposé of the “secrets” of Freemasonry. Miller, Morgan, and other backers of the
project were harassed and threatened, but went forward with the project. On 10 September 1826,
some three weeks after Morgan had received a
copyright for his book, Illustrations of Masonry,
507

Mormonism

Miller’s print shop was set on fire in an apparent
attempt to stop the book’s publication. The same
day, a member of the Canandaigua Masonic lodge
obtained a warrant for Morgan’s arrest on charges
of petty theft. Morgan was arrested the next day
and taken to Canandaigua. He was released for lack
of evidence, but was immediately rearrested on
debt charges and imprisoned. The following night,
Morgan was abducted from the Canandaigua jail
and forced into a carriage by four men; he was
never seen again.
Reports of Morgan’s disappearance raised questions about the extent of Masonic involvement in the
incident. Popular accounts of a conspiracy, which
was said to involve nearly seventy Masonic brethren,
held that Morgan had initially been taken to Canada,
where plans to pay him in exchange for staying out
of the United States had fallen through. After a few
days, according to these charges, he was bound with
weights and thrown into the Niagara River just
below the falls. When a decomposed male corpse
was found near Lake Ontario more than a year after
Morgan’s disappearance, the corpse was initially
identified and buried as Morgan, though many
charged that the local coroner, hoping to please the
anti-Masonic movement, had deliberately ignored
signs that called its identity into question. The body
was later exhumed and identified as one Timothy
Munroe. Morgan’s body was never recovered, and
some held that he had not been murdered at all, but
had resettled in Canada or the West Indies.
The Morgan affair also fed public alarm about the
amount of influence the Freemasons had on government. Half of all officials in the county where
Morgan disappeared, and as many as two-thirds of
officeholders across New York State, including thengovernor DeWitt Clinton, belonged to Masonic
lodges. The light sentences given to the four men
involved in the Canandaigua kidnapping increased
the furor. Anti-Masonic conventions were held in
the area, and the delegates called for a special counsel to be appointed to investigate the case. The
resulting investigation went on for five years; a total
of fifty-four Masons were indicted and thirty-nine
were tried, but only ten were convicted of crimes,

508

and no definitive resolution of the case was found.
Charges of a Masonic “cover-up” in the Morgan
affair fueled the first national mass anti-Masonic
movement, which spawned dozens of newspapers
and other publications and created a political party,
and which viewed Freemasonry as an enemy to the
values of the “Christian democracy.”
Dana Luciano
See also: Anti-Masonic Party; Freemasonry.
References
Formisano, Ronald P., and Kathleen Smith
Kutolowsi. 1977. “Antimasonry and Masonry: The
Genesis of Protest, 1826–27.” American
Quarterly 29: 140–46.
Goodman, Paul. 1988. Towards a Christian
Republic: Antimasonry and the Great Tradition in
New England, 1826–1836. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Vaughn, William Preston. 1983. The Antimasonic
Party in the United States, 1826–1843. Lexington:
The University Press of Kentucky.

Mormonism
The Mormon Church (Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints) was established on 6 April 1830,
amid the religious fervor of the American Second
Great Awakening. Founded by Joseph Smith, Jr.
(1805–1844), it was from the beginning the target of
suspicion and oppression. In 1820, Smith, a mystic,
treasure seeker, and diviner, claimed to have received a visit from God the Father and Jesus Christ.
During this visitation Smith was told that all of the
churches had turned aside from God and he had
been commissioned to restore the “true church.”
Seven years later Smith was contacted by the angel
Moroni giving him instructions on where to find a set
of gold plates inscribed with the Book of Mormon
(written by and named after Moroni’s father). The
book was written in “reformed Egyptian” and had to
be translated through the “Urim and Thummim,”
two seer (or peep) stones that were set in a breastplate worn over the shoulders. The translation took
three years and the plates were “swept away” by
Moroni after it was done. In 1830, Smith published
the book and a new religion was born.

Mormonism

Attacks on Mormonism
Since publication, the Book of Mormon has been
attacked as an elaborate fraud. Critics have claimed
that if Smith did not plagiarize it from the Old Testament and other sources, he made it up entirely.
These charges have become harder to deflect in
recent years, as evidence has emerged challenging
the truthfulness of Joseph Smith on such matters as
his conviction for treasure hunting and his use of
folk magic. More damaging yet was the discovery of
the actual scroll Smith allegedly used in his translation of the Book of Abraham.
From its inception, the cult faced suspicion and
hostility from larger society. Anti-Mormon feeling
fed on the more general nativist fear of internal
subversion in the United States of the nineteenth
century. Faced with a rapidly changing society,
many felt the need for unity and closed ranks
against the forces of anti-U.S. movements. Any
group thought too different was highly suspect and
Americans suspected immigrants, Catholics, and
Freemasons of plotting to overthrow the republic.
Ultimately, nativists feared that these “un-American” groups wanted to control all of the United
States. Mormons provided one more outlet for the
mass paranoia.
Despite the heartfelt contention of most Mormons that they were Christians, the sect has never
been accepted by Christian churches. They see the
Mormon claim as an attempt to wrap their cultlike
views in the respectable blanket of Christianity.
This claim was perceived as another manifestation
of the attempt to cover up the giant conspiracy.
A major cause of suspicion was that the Latterday Saints (LDS) exhibited several characteristics
that were viewed as un-American. Because Mormon leaders ruled with an iron hand, they were
seen as an unscrupulous, autocratic group of megalomaniacs plotting to overthrow the moral and
social order. In addition, the secrecy of rituals
fueled suspicion that the group was performing and
plotting immoral and illegal acts.
Even the structure of the sect caused some to
view it as un-American. The membership was looked
upon as unwitting and docile dupes—more mindless

machines than humans. The sect demanded total
allegiance and dominated virtually all aspects of its
adherent’s life. These traits were viewed as a threat
to the very basis of American life—democracy, religion, and justice.
Of all the frightening rituals of the LDS, it was
their belief in polygamy that brought forth the most
outrage and disgust from their critics. Most Americans viewed the practice as a form of slavery.
Through polygamy women became mere concubines at the beck and call of their masters. Multiple
wives also provided a setting for all forms of
immorality and critics imagined all variety of sexual
abominations taking place within the Mormon
sanctuary.
Mormon History
In 1833, the LDS faced their first real attacks and
were forced to leave Jackson County, Missouri.
When less subtle methods failed (opponents had
destroyed the Mormon printing press and tarred
and feathered the local leader), anti-Mormons went
on a rampage. They burned and pillaged the Mormon settlement, forcing the residents to flee for
their lives.
In December 1840 Smith gathered the faithful in
Illinois. He obtained a city charter from the state
government and established the new community of
Nauvoo. With the concomitant right to organize a
government, including a militia, he felt that the sect
was insulated from persecution.
The initial years at Nauvoo were good for Smith
and the Mormons. He managed to fill in the structure of his rapidly growing sect and even ran for
U.S. president. Although he lost his bid for the
presidency, the prophet was elected both mayor
and lieutenant-general of the militia of Nauvoo.
This intertwining of church and state offended
many in Illinois, yet the Mormons might have
weathered the storm had Smith not announced
several additional heaven-sent proclamations.
At Nauvoo, Smith (with the official title of “Seer,
a Translator, a Prophet, an Apostle of Jesus Christ,
and Elder of the Church through the will of God the
Father, and the Grace of Your Lord Jesus Christ”)

509

Mormonism

continued to have revelations regarding the mission
and structure of the new denomination. Several of
these revelations were especially vexing for many
people, including some of the higher-ranking faithful. Smith first sealed some rituals and parts of the
temple off to outsiders, and this “secrecy” served to
further raise the suspicions of the larger community.
In addition, Smith distanced his religion from traditional Christianity by proclaiming that humans, like
God, were eternal and not created beings, and that
the faithful could become gods themselves.
It was, however, Smith’s pronouncement on marriage that really served to outrage people both within
and outside of the sect. In 1844, Smith called for his
disciples to adopt the ways of the Old Testament
patriarchs and take multiple wives. Smith himself
apparently had already been practicing polygamy for
several years and had married at least forty-nine
women. The call for a return to polygamy set off a
firestorm. While some of the faithful reluctantly took
on additional wives, several left the sect and founded
an anti-Smith newspaper in Nauvoo.
The Nauvoo Expositor was founded to expose the
immoral practices, megalomania, and delusions of
grandeur of the prophet and called for a return to the
original teachings of the church, but the newspaper
was only able to publish one issue. Smith ordered the
paper’s printing press destroyed, the type scattered,
and all recovered newspapers burned. The destruction of the opposition press resulted in the arrest of
Smith and several of his confederates. While incarcerated, both Smith and his brother Hyram were
murdered by a mob on 27 June 1844.
After the death of Joseph Smith his followers
split into a multitude of factions, each claiming to
be the true church. The bulk of the faithful chose
to follow Brigham Young, one of the church’s senior apostles. In the wake of Smith’s murder, Young
managed to rally the faithful and when faced with
a possible government-sponsored eviction from
Nauvoo, led them on a heroic trek to the Salt Lake
area of Utah.
The migration west had been a goal of Joseph
Smith. He felt that outside of U.S. territory the sect
could practice their religion without interference.
Unfortunately for Smith’s dream, only three years
510

after Young led the faithful to Utah in 1847, it
became a U.S. territory. Initially, the religionists were
left to their own devices. Within a few years, however, Young’s autocratic government, the entanglement of church and state, and the issue of polygamy
raised the ire of the national government. In 1857,
President James Buchanan ordered troops into the
area to “restore order.” The Mormons, while appearing ready to fight, acceded to the superior force and
Young negotiated a peaceful resolution to the crisis.
The only casualties in the “Mormon War” were a
group of 120 California-bound settlers who were
brutally murdered by a Mormon militia at Mountain
Meadows.
Despite their attempts at isolation, the LDS continued to have to deal with the wider world. As
Utah grew and the United States solidified its control over the West, the Mormons were forced to
dismantle the church-controlled political party and
officially abandon the practice of polygamy in
order to pave the way for statehood. Some families,
disgusted with this abandonment of the founder’s
teachings, left for areas in Canada and Mexico
where they could continue the practice of multiple
marriages.
By the time of Utah statehood in 1898, the Latterday Saints had moved from a radical millennialist
sect to a prosperous and stable denomination. As
their influence spread to surrounding states the
Mormons became a major part of the religious landscape of the United States. Today, the Utah-based
church boasts 11 million members, with 5.5 million
in the United States. It still, however, has not gained
acceptance as a mainstream denomination.
Enoch Baker
See also: Nativism.
References
Bushman, Richard and Claudia. 2001. Building the
Kingdom. New York: Oxford University Press.
Davis, David Brion. 1960. “Some Themes of
Counter-Subversion: An Analysis of Anti-Masonic,
Anti-Catholic, and Anti-Mormon Literature.” The
Mississippi Valley Historical Review 2: 205–224.
Gordon, Sarah Barringer. 2002. The Mormon
Question: Polygamy and Constitutional Conflict
in Nineteenth-Century America. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press.

Morse, Jedidiah

Melton, J. Gordon, ed. 1990. Evangelical Christian
Anti-Mormonism in the Twentieth Century. New
York: Garland Publishing.

Morse, Jedidiah
Rev. Jedidiah Morse (1761–1826) was one of the
early American Republic’s best-known authors and
clergymen, serving as pastor of the First Congregational Church of Charlestown, Massachusetts (now
part of Boston) for thirty years. Perhaps counterbalancing his other accomplishments, Morse was also
one of the forerunners in the field of U.S. conspiracy theory.
Besides his pastoral duties and frequent service
as an orator on civic and political occasions, Morse
was a pioneer in American geography, producing
one of the first popular books on the subject, Geography Made Easy (1784), just a year after his graduation from Yale College. This was followed by a
series of other works, most notably the two-volume
American Universal Geography (1793), which altogether went through hundreds of editions. In an
age when travel was still difficult, expensive, and
infrequent, it is not too much to say that Jedidiah
Morse taught most Americans of his day most of
what they knew of the country beyond their own
immediate horizons.
Morse also made a name for himself as a prominent purveyor of anti-Illuminati conspiracy theories.
In the hysterical era of the XYZ Affair and the Alien
and Sedition Acts in the 1790s, Morse lent his considerable energy and prestige to the project of turning the Bavarian Illuminati into a mainstream political issue. Joined by many other prominent New
England divines, including Yale College president
Timothy Dwight, Morse almost succeeded.
Like many other old-fashioned New England
Calvinists, Morse was deeply alarmed at the seeming rise of “infidelity” in the 1790s, a category into
which he put not just the outright rejection of Christian belief, but also its liberalization into less supernatural, more rational forms such as Unitarianism
and deism. Besides mankind’s innate wickedness,
Morse and his colleagues blamed radical politics,
especially the French Revolution and its American

sympathizers, for the decline of faith, and vice versa.
The year 1794 was a turning point. Robespierre’s
reign of terror raged in France, while the Democratic Republican Societies and the Whiskey Rebellion
disturbed the political peace at home. That same
year, deist speaker and organizer Elihu Palmer
toured the United States, and Thomas Paine’s attack
on revealed religion, The Age of Reason, first arrived
on U.S. shores. Under the infidels’ influence, Morse
believed, “uncleanness, Sabbath breaking & all the
flood of iniquity which springs from these” ran riot
among the people. To pillars of New England’s Federalist/Congregationalist “Standing Order,” under
which the churches were supported by taxes and
ministers used their pulpits to support the ruling
political elite, it seemed that a “mental epidemic”
was sweeping the country (Phillips, 68).
It only got worse as the 1790s wore on. Criticism
of the government, and political activism against it,
grew more intense during the battles over the Jay
Treaty with England in 1796 and the presidency in
the 1796 election. The pious Federalist John Adams
beat the free-thinking Jefferson in that election, but
with war against the French looming, Federalist
hysteria came to a fever pitch.
It was in this atmosphere, in 1797, that Jedidiah
Morse, Timothy Dwight, and their colleagues discovered John Robison’s Proofs of a Conspiracy, finding in its account of the Illuminati campaign to
destroy all religions and governments a ready explanation for many political and cultural trends that disturbed them. Morse launched his personal campaign
against the Illuminati by giving two sermons on the
national fast day proclaimed by President Adams for
9 May 1798, one at his own church and one at North
Church, Boston. Following New England tradition,
where sermons were popular reading matter and
often served as political tracts, Morse’s effort was
published soon afterwards.
In his Sermon on the National Fast Day, Morse
attacked the “deep-laid plan” of the French Republic “to destroy the confidence of the [American] people” in the men and institutions that governed them,
a plan being implemented not just by the French
themselves, but also by their local minions, the
Democratic Republicans (Stauffer, 230). What was
511

Morse, Jedidiah

worse, they had criticized the clergy, too, suggesting
that some secret, even deeper design was “in operation, hostile to true liberty and religion,” preparing
the way “for the spread” here of “that atheistical philosophy” that was “deluging the Old World in misery
and blood.” Morse recommended Robison’s book as
a judicious explanation of everything that was happening, attributing it all to “the dark conspiracies of
the Illuminati” (Stauffer, 232–233).
Initially the response was less sensational than
Morse must have hoped, but the controversy kept
him and the Illuminati in the public eye for most of
the next two years. Democratic Republican newspapers questioned Robison’s veracity, printing negative
reviews of the book from the British press, and
demanded proof of the charges. Not much proof
was to be had, but Morse gamely struck back with
newspaper articles and clippings defending Robison
and attacking their critics. At the same, Salem minister William Bentley, a rare Jeffersonian among the
Massachusetts clergy, supplied equal amounts of
material damning Morse’s position and his sources.
The controversy was renewed and expanded with
a round of published Thanksgiving sermons from
Morse and many other New England ministers over
the winter of 1798–1799. Morse’s included an
appendix that tried to document a view of American
events closely following the pattern of Robison’s and
the Abbé Barruel’s accounts of the French Revolution. The Democratic Republican Societies of 1793–
1794 were not mere debating clubs, he tried to
show, but extensions of the Illuminati. They had
been founded by a French agent, “Citizen” Edmond
Genet, and merely went underground and reappeared under other names after President Washington had publicly blamed them for the Whiskey
Rebellion.
Morse finally seemed to get his Illuminati witchhunt on firm ground with a third published sermon,
originally given on another national fast day, 25 April
1799. This time a triumphant Morse claimed finally
to have “complete and indubitable proof that such
societies do exist, and have for many years existed, in
the United States” (Stuaffer, 292). The smoking gun
was a letter detailing the membership and organization (all the way back in 1786) of a somewhat irreg512

ular Masonic organization called Wisdom Lodge in
Portsmouth, Virginia, made up chiefly of immigrants from St. Domingue and France. There were
suggestions of other U.S. lodges being in contact
with Wisdom Lodge, and a mother club in France,
but the connection to the Bavarian Illuminati was
tenuous at best and the evidence of any real influence nonexistent.
Nevertheless, Morse felt the case was sealed, and
the Illuminati theory gained some ground, until it
was derailed by a new controversy over Morse’s own
integrity. It happened that both Morse and his
antagonist William Bentley were in correspondence
with the German geographer Christoph Ebeling. To
both men, Ebeling had written letters castigating
Robison’s book, contradicting many of the alleged
facts it cited, and dismissing the idea that the Bavarian Illuminati still existed in any form. Rumors of the
letters began to circulate in the summer of 1799.
The following autumn, Bentley saw to it that the text
of his Ebeling letter appeared in several newspapers, anonymously but describing the writer and
recipient in such a way that readers might assume
the Massachusetts man who received the letter was
Morse himself.
The Illuminati theory’s chief U.S. backer was
forced on the defensive, unable to come clean
without admitting that he had covered up incriminating information even though it was provided by
a respected colleague. By the end of 1799, Republican newspapers were openly ridiculing Morse and
his ideas, and building a sort of satirical conspiracy
theory about the “New England Illuminati,” an oligarchy of “political priests” of which Morse was said
to be a ringleader.
Morse soon had to drop the Illuminati theory
from his repertoire, although he continued to fight
for the old-time Puritan religion in other ways over
the rest of his life. His skills as a controversialist and
publishing entrepreneur were put to good use
resisting the teaching of liberal theology at Harvard,
promoting missions to the Indians and western migrants, and helping establish Andover Theological
Seminary, the New England Tract Society, the
American Bible Society, and the American Tract
Society.

MOVE

The family tradition of scientific and artistic
achievement mixed with conspiracy was carried on
by Jedidiah’s son, Samuel F. B. Morse.
Jeffrey L. Pasley
See also: Alien and Sedition Acts; Barruel, Abbé;
Illuminati; Robison, John; Whiskey Rebellion; XYZ
Affair.
References
Jackson, Leon. 1999. “Jedidiah Morse and the
Transformation of Print Culture in New England,
1784–1826.” Early American Literature 34: 2–31.
Morse, James King. [1939] 1967. Jedidiah Morse: A
Champion of New England Orthodoxy. New
York: AMS Press.
Nash, Gary B. 1965. “The American Clergy and the
French Revolution.” William and Mary Quarterly
3d ser., 22: 392–412.
Phillips, Joseph W. 1983. Jedidiah Morse and New
England Congregationalism. New Brunswick:
Rutgers University Press.
Stauffer, Vernon. [1918] 1967. New England and the
Bavarian Illuminati. New York: Russell and
Russell.

MOVE
A radical African American activist organization,
MOVE was influenced by many of the Left’s turn to
paranoia and conspiratorial thinking in the countercultural years of the late 1960s and early 1970s.
Like those that made up the Weathermen and the
Black Panther Party, MOVE members saw mainstream U.S. culture as beyond repair, and sought to
form a counterconspiracy to create an alternative
society in which its members could live.
MOVE—it is unclear if the name of the organization has ever acted as a specific acronym—was
founded in 1972 in the Powelton Village neighborhood of Philadelphia by African American handyman Vincent Leaphart. With the assistance of white
graduate-student activist Donald Glassey, Leaphart
(now calling himself John Africa; all MOVE members took the last name of Africa) wrote the Guidelines, a manifesto detailing the beliefs of MOVE.
This document, clearly influenced by the countercultural New Left, Black Power, and environmental
movements of the late 1960s/early 1970s,
attempted to establish MOVE as a viable political

organization, touching upon such themes as racism,
police brutality, vegetarianism, technology, and
political representation. In fact, much of MOVE’s
early writings and rhetoric attempted to revive and
build upon these earlier movements and, in the
process, cure them of their excesses. Africa stressed
the importance of cleansing one’s body, insisting
that his followers abstain from all drugs and medicines, alcohol, meat, and ostentatious clothing. Science was “a trick” that only served to inculcate people into the “addictions” of the “System lifestyle”
(Anderson and Hevenor, 9). What was needed,
Africa stressed, was a back-to-nature manner of living. There would therefore be no birth control
practiced within the MOVE organization, and
members’ diets would consist almost exclusively of
raw fruits and vegetables. Trash, human waste, and
even dead animals were left to “cycle” back to the
earth on MOVE property, leading to run-ins with
both neighbors and the Philadelphia police. At the
same time, MOVE children were to be naked in the
summer and only lightly clothed in the winter, while
adult males and females were commanded to grow
their hair into unwashed dreadlocks and dress alike
in blue jeans, blue denim jackets, and heavy-soled
men’s boots.
MOVE saw schools, political parties and leaders,
and all branches of the law as corrupt and enslaving. Moreover, the forces that controlled such institutions were viewed as actively conspiring against
MOVE members and their allies. For example, as
MOVE member Jeanne Africa explained, “drugs
were in the black community for a long time, but
they didn’t have [drug rehabilitation] programs
until it got into the white community. . . . The hierarchy would give you drugs to control you” (qtd. in
Anderson and Hevenor, 7). To MOVE, the most
concrete representatives of this hierarchy were the
police, and MOVE held many demonstrations
aimed at focusing attention on issues of police
abuse and brutality (Philadelphia, under law-andorder Mayor Frank L. Rizzo, had a national reputation for police misconduct during much of the
1970s). In a seven-month period in 1975, MOVE
members were arrested on misdemeanor charges
more than 150 times, fined $15,000, and sentenced
513

MOVE

to several lengthy prison sentences. Seeing the
court system as perhaps the most oppressive tool of
the “System” conspiracy, MOVE members made it
a point to interrupt these sentencing hearings,
often turning MOVE trials into veritable sideshows
(Wagner-Pacifici, 29).
As the 1970s drew to a close, MOVE’s rhetoric
became more fiery and condemnatory, while their
political activities became more confrontational—
with members often seen brandishing firearms.
Such trends were intensified after an 8 August 1978
confrontation with the police, which resulted in one
officer dead and nine MOVE members sentenced
to 30–100 years for their roles in the melee. Seeing
themselves once again as victims of unwarranted
oppression, MOVE made it their mission—from
their new headquarters on Osage Avenue in west
Philadelphia—to continuously call for the release of
the “MOVE 9,” whom they saw as political prisoners
in their struggle against the tyrannical Philadelphia
government. This campaign, often carried out
through megaphones and speakers from inside the
increasingly fortified MOVE compound, reached its
violent conclusion on 13 May 1985, when a showdown between the organization and the Philadelphia city government left eleven members dead (six
adults and five children) and sixty-one homes
destroyed. MOVE member Ramona Africa was convicted on riot and conspiracy charges in connection
with the conflict, and served seven years in prison.
MOVE continued to stay in the news throughout
the remaining years of the 1980s, and even into the
twenty-first century. In the aftermath of the tremendous destruction on Osage Avenue, then-Mayor Wilson W. Goode appointed the Philadelphia Special
Investigation Commission to examine the events
leading up to, and including, the attack on MOVE.
In March 1986, the commission issued a report condemning the actions of the city government, concluding that “dropping a bomb on an occupied row
house was unconscionable” (Anderson and Hevenor,
389). In June 1996, a jury ordered the city of
Philadelphia and two former city officials—thenPolice Commissioner Gregor Sambor and then-Fire
Commissioner William Richard—to pay $1.5 million

514

to a survivor and relatives of two members who died
in the May 1985 confrontation. To many MOVE
members and supporters, such findings vindicated
their belief that the city had actively conspired
against them throughout the previous two decades,
and was now being made to pay for such actions.
During the 1990s, many supporters of convicted
murderer Mumia Abu-Jamal—who had written
extensively on the 1978 MOVE confrontation and
resulting trials—argued that Abu-Jamal had
received an unjust sentence based in part on his
association with MOVE. Finally, in September 2002
a man involved in a bitter custody dispute with a
member of MOVE was found shot to death in a car
in New Jersey, the same day he was to pick up the
boy for an unsupervised visit. While there was no
evidence tying the organization to the murder,
MOVE representatives quickly denied any involvement in the crime, and in fact argued that the government was setting up MOVE for the killing. A
steadfast belief in a vast conspiracy against them has
clearly followed MOVE into the new millennium.
Michael H. Carriere
See also: Black Panthers; Weathermen.
References
Anderson, John, and Hilary Hevenor. 1997. Burning
Down the House: MOVE and the Tragedy of
Philadelphia. New York: W. W. Norton &
Company.
Assefa, Hizkias, and Paul Wahrhaftig. 1990. The
MOVE Crisis in Philadelphia: Extremist Groups
and Conflict Resolution. Pittsburgh, PA:
University of Pittsburgh Press.
Bowser, Charles W. 1989. Let the Bunker Burn: The
Final Battle with MOVE. Philadelphia, PA:
Camino Books.
“Maple Shade Murder.” 2002. Channel 6 website,
September 27: abclocal.go.com/wpvi/news/
92702_MOVE.html.
“Philadelphia, city officials ordered to pay $1.5
million in MOVE case.” 1996. CNN website,
June 24: www.cnn.com/US/9606/24/move.vertict.
Wagner-Pacifici, Robin. 1994. Discourse and
Destruction: The City of Philadelphia versus
MOVE. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago
Press.
Website
MOVE: www.moveorg.net.

Muhammad, Elijah

Muhammad, Elijah
Elijah Muhammad was the most important early
leader of the Nation of Islam, leading the organization for over forty years. Muhammad taught that
blacks were the original human race and that whites
were evil beings who had conspired to oppress blacks
out of jealousy. The division between the races was a
distinction between good and evil, and although
whites might currently seem to hold the advantage,
the day was soon coming when blacks would, with
their superior intelligence and ingenuity, destroy

their white oppressors. His mixture of religious zeal,
black militantism, and use of conspiracy theories to
offer compelling explanations for the plight of disadvantaged blacks played a key role in the growth of the
Nation of Islam as an important social movement.
He was also central to the development of later
influential individuals such as Malcolm X and Louis
Farrakhan.
Elijah Muhammad was born Elijah Poole in 1897.
As he was the son of a sharecropper, Muhammad’s
early life was dominated by poverty. In 1923, he

Elijah Muhammad addresses followers, including Cassius Clay. World Telegram & Sun photo by Stanley Wolfson.
(Library of Congress)

515

Muhammad, Elijah

moved to Detroit and began working at an automobile factory. In 1930 Muhammad came into contact
with Wallace Fard. Fard claimed to be from the
“East” (although his actual personal history is
obscure and filled with conflicting accounts of his
early life). Preaching a mixture of Islam and black
separatism, Fard found a large number of converts
among the African American community in Depression-era Detroit. Muhammad attended one of Fard’s
meetings and became a convert to the Black Muslim
movement. Muhammad soon became a trusted
deputy of Fard, and it was from Fard that Muhammad received his Muslim name. When Fard suddenly disappeared from Detroit in 1934, Muhammad assumed leadership of the Black Muslim
movement. He moved the headquarters of the
organization to Chicago and made several spiritual
and practical changes in the organization. Muhammad preached that Fard had been an incarnation of
Allah, and claimed himself to be Allah’s messenger.
He also freely mixed ideas of traditional Islam with
those of black nationalism, particularly as outlined by
Marcus Garvey.
During World War II, Muhammad was sent to
prison for avoiding the draft. He also openly expressed sympathies toward the Japanese, whom he
felt were allies in the fight to end white power in the
United States. After his release from prison in 1946,
Muhammad continued to build the Nation of Islam’s
reach and membership. Chief among his aides in
this task was Malcolm X, who became second only to
Muhammad himself in his influence in the movement. After returning from his trip to Mecca in
1964, however, Malcolm X broke from the Nation of
Islam, asserting, among other things, that Muhammad had fathered several illegitimate children with
young staff members of the Nation of Islam. The
assassination of Malcolm X in 1965 and the convic-

516

tion of three Black Muslims for the crime cast a
shadow of suspicion over Muhammad, along with
his new chief aide, Louis Farrakhan.
Throughout his life, Muhammad preached strict
separation of the races and couched these beliefs in
a cosmology that drew on imagery ranging from the
Old Testament to science fiction. He taught that
whites were a race who had been bred by an evil scientist 6,000 years ago. Whites were without the intellectual, physical, or moral qualities that were seen in
blacks. He often spoke in apocalyptic terms about a
future battle in the sky in which the “Mother Plane,”
a gigantic spaceship built and manned by blacks of
superhuman intelligence, would effortlessly destroy
the supposed power of the white man. After this battle, a new world would be created according to
Allah’s will in which blacks will hold dominion.
Muhammad died in February 1975. His son
became the new leader of the Nation of Islam, but
he discarded the name as well as some of his father’s
beliefs. After he formed the Muslim American Community, several members of the Black Muslim movement left to follow Farrakhan’s reestablished Nation
of Islam, a group devoted to reinvigorating the message of Muhammad.
Ted Remington
See also: African Americans; AIDS; Cocaine;
Farrakhan, Louis; Nation of Islam.
References
Evanzz, Karl. 1999. The Messenger: The Rise and
Fall of Elijah Muhammad. New York: Pantheon
Books.
Goldberg, Robert. 2001. Enemies Within. New
Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Muhammad, Elijah. 1965. Message to the Blackman
in America. Chicago: Muhammad Mosque of
Islam No. 2.
Website
Nation of Islam: http://www.noi.org.

N
Nation of Islam
Mixing elements of traditional Islamic belief with
black nationalism, the Nation of Islam has played an
important and often controversial role in racial politics in the United States since its founding in 1930.
A number of important African American leaders
have emerged from its ranks, including Elijah
Muhammad, Malcolm X, and Louis Farrakhan. A
central tenet of the Nation of Islam is that most of
the social and economic problems faced by blacks
are the result of a long-term conspiracy among
whites to disempower them. Several members of
the Nation of Islam have singled out Jews as playing
a particularly important role in this white conspiracy. While praised for its focus on self-sufficiency
and pride among African Americans, the Nation of
Islam has been criticized for its calls for racial separation as well as its often racist and antisemitic
teachings.
Two groups that preceded the Nation of Islam
and laid much of its religious and political groundwork were the Moorish Science Temple and the
Universal Negro Improvement Association. The
Moorish Science Temple was founded in 1913 by
Drew Ali (born Timothy Drew). Drew believed that
Islam was the original religion of the Africans who
were brought to the United States as slaves, and he
preached that a return to Islam was a necessary step
for true freedom for African Americans. The Universal Negro Improvement Association was founded
by Marcus Garvey, who advocated black separatism
and self-sufficiency.

The Nation of Islam itself is usually said to have
begun in 1930 when Wali Farad Muhammad (born
Wallace Fard) founded the Lost-Found Nation of
Islam in Detroit, Michigan. Farad claimed to be an
orthodox Muslim born in Mecca, but the facts of his
early life are obscure and still debated. Fard
preached a mixture of Islam, black separatism, and
his own beliefs. At the core of his philosophy was the
assertion that blacks needed to free themselves from
the tyranny of white oppression by rejecting Christianity in favor of Islam (or, more specifically, Fard’s
version of Islam). Only then would blacks regain
their rightful place as the most advanced people on
earth. He also preached that black people were the
original race of human beings and had lived on earth
for 66 trillion years. White people were the result of
an experiment done 6,000 years ago by an evil scientist named Yakub, and lacked the physical, spiritual, and intellectual abilities of blacks.
After Farad suddenly disappeared from Detroit
in 1934, leadership of the group he founded was
passed to his trusted associate, Elijah Muhammad.
It was Muhammad who built the Nation of Islam
from a small circle of believers to a national, and
even international, force. Muhammad founded a
temple in Chicago, and after World War II, membership climbed steadily.
Like Farad before him, Muhammad preached that
white people were “blue-eyed devils” who had systematically oppressed blacks. He augmented Farad’s
teachings with an increased focus on practical means
to improve the lot of African Americans and allow
517

National Rifle Association

them to be self-sufficient. Under Muhammad’s leadership, the Nation of Islam owned several businesses
and had significant real estate holdings.
In the late 1950s and early 1960s, the public
image of the Nation of Islam grew through the work
of charismatic members, most notably Malcolm X.
In 1964, however, Malcolm X broke away from the
Nation of Islam and its teachings of strict racial separation. The break was caused by his pilgrimage to
Mecca, where he came into contact with Muslims
of many different ethnicities, and his discovery that
Muhammad had fathered several illegitimate children with women staff members of the Nation of
Islam.
In 1965, Louis Farrakhan replaced Malcolm X as
minister of the Nation of Islam temple in Harlem.
Farrakhan also publicly denounced Malcolm X, saying he was “worthy of death.” Later that same year,
Malcolm X was assassinated. Three members of the
Nation of Islam were convicted of the murder, and
it was widely assumed that the assassination was
approved of by the leadership of the Nation of
Islam. Rumors about Farrakhan’s possible knowledge of or involvement in the killing persisted for
decades.
In 1975, Elijah Muhammad died, and leadership
of the Nation of Islam passed to his son, Warith
Muhammad. The younger Muhammad moved the
organization away from many of his father’s teachings, particularly his more strident views on race,
and toward a more traditional version of Sunni
Islam. He also changed the name of the organization to the World Community of Al-Islam in the
West. Dissatisfied with the new direction of the
movement, Farrakhan reconstituted the Nation of
Islam under its original name, returning focus to
the teachings of Elijah Muhammad.
Under Farrakhan’s leadership, the Nation of
Islam has been both reviled and praised. The publication by the Nation of Islam of The Secret Relationship between Blacks and Jews: Volume One, in
1991, caused a great deal of controversy for its allegations that Jews had been at the center of the
slave trade from its beginnings through the nineteenth century. Coupled with antisemitic remarks
made by Farrakhan and a number of other high518

ranking Nation members, the book renewed
charges that the Nation of Islam is an inherently
racist organization devoted to divisiveness and conspiracy-mongering. Farrakhan’s organization of the
Million Man March in 1995, however, brought
praise from many for its positive message to
African American men.
Ted Remington
See also: AIDS; African Americans, Cocaine;
Farrakhan, Louis; Muhammad, Elijah.
References
Goldberg, Robert. 2001. Enemies Within. New
Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Historical Research Department of the Nation of
Islam. 1991. The Secret Relationship between
Blacks and Jews. Historical Research Department
of the Nation of Islam.
Lee, Martha F. 1996. The Nation of Islam: An
American Millenarian Movement. Syracuse, NY:
Syracuse University Press.
Websites
Nation of Islam: http://www.noi.org.
Anti-Defamation League: http://www.adl.org/
main_islam.asp.
The Final Call: http://www.finalcall.com.

National Rifle Association
The National Rifle Association (NRA) is an organization that promotes the rights and interests of gun
owners, and often views any perceived restriction of
those rights and interests by the government as a
conspiracy against the liberty of its members.
It was founded in 1871 by Colonel William C.
Church and General George W. Wingate. Prompted
by worries over the poor marksmanship of Union
soldiers during the Civil War, the NRA’s initial aim
was simply to improve the shooting skills of its
members. This emphasis on marksmanship,
together with sporting and other recreational uses of
firearms, especially hunting, remained the NRA’s
principal focus of activity until the 1960s. Although
the NRA continues to offer a range of services to its
approximately 3 million members, including educational, safety, and training programs, insurance
packages, discounts on gun-related products, and
even loans, as well as publishing a number of maga-

National Rifle Association

zines including the American Rifleman, American
Hunter, and American Guardian, since the late
1960s it has become increasingly involved in the politics of gun ownership. It is this shift of emphasis
that has led to criticisms that the NRA has become
conspiratorial both in its outlook and in its attempts
to resist the imposition of restrictions on gun ownership in the United States.
The origins of the NRA’s greater political involvement can be traced to the successful passage of the
Gun Control Act of 1968. The wave of political assassinations that took place during the 1960s—most
notably those of President John F. Kennedy, his
brother Senator Robert F. Kennedy, and the African
American leaders Malcolm X and the Reverend
Martin Luther King, Jr.—created a widespread
debate about the place of guns in U.S. society and
this, in turn, led to the 1968 legislation. The Gun
Control Act was the most substantial congressional
regulation of firearms since the National Firearms
Act of 1934. Among other things, it prohibited the
interstate shipment of firearms and ammunition to
private individuals; banned the importation of surplus military firearms into the United States except
those suitable for sporting purposes; and prevented
the sale of guns to minors, drug addicts, the mentally
ill, and convicted felons.
Many NRA members were concerned that the
Gun Control Act might be the first step toward
more stringent restrictions on gun ownership. Led
by Harlon Carter, these members pushed for more
political action on the part of the organization. As a
result, in 1975 the NRA established an Institute for
Legislative Action (ILA) to direct its political lobbying activities and in 1976 created a political action
committee, the NRA Political Victory Fund, to provide support both for sympathetic officeholders and
those seeking public office. The transformation of
the NRA into a much more politically oriented
interest group was confirmed at its 1977 convention
in Cincinnati when, in what became known as the
“Cincinnati Revolt,” Carter and his supporters succeeded in gaining control of the organization from
its more traditionally inclined members.
This is not to say that the nature and extent of the
NRA’s political activities have been uncontested

since the 1970s. On the contrary, the NRA is often
subject to internecine conflict about the direction of
its political activities. During the 1990s, for example,
there was a long-running dispute between the
“purist” approach of Neal Knox and the “pragmatist”
strategy of Wayne LaPierre. The dispute climaxed at
the annual meeting of the NRA’s board of directors
in Seattle in 1997 when Knox sought to unseat
LaPierre as the NRA’s executive vice-president by
supporting the candidacy of Donna Dianchi. However, not only was Dianchi defeated by LaPierre,
Knox himself lost his seat on the organization’s board
of directors as first vice-president to longtime NRA
member and NRA spokesman, the actor Charlton
Heston. Heston became the NRA president in 1998.
Despite such internal struggles, the broad approach of the NRA since the 1970s has been characterized as one of almost complete and unyielding
opposition to any kind of gun control legislation or to
any attempt to regulate gun ownership, and it is this
attitude that draws criticism that the organization
has a conspiratorial worldview. For instance, in the
mid-1980s the NRA opposed legislation to ban
armor-piercing “cop-killer” bullets—opposition that
led, in part, to a break in the formerly close relationship between police organizations and the
NRA—and during the 1990s it opposed the passage
of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act of
1993 and the “assault weapons ban” within the Violent Crime Control Act of 1994. The Brady law was
the first piece of major gun control legislation since
the Gun Control Act of 1968. Its main effect was to
institute a five-day waiting period for handgun purchases. The Violent Crime Control Act of 1994
banned the sale or use of nineteen types of semiautomatic assault weapons and placed a ten-bullet
limit on gun clips.
The NRA objects to legislation like the Brady law
or the assault weapons ban for two main reasons:
first, because it sees them as infringements of
Americans’ constitutional right to keep and bear
arms as contained in the Second Amendment, and
second, because it fears that such restrictions indicate moves toward the total disarmament of U.S.
citizens. In an article in the June 1994 issue of the
American Rifleman entitled “The Final War Has
519

National Security Agency

Begun,” for example, Wayne LaPierre claimed he
had secret evidence that “the full scale war to . . .
eliminate private firearms ownership completely
and forever” was “well underway” (Stern, 111). The
NRA, he argued, had to employ all its resources to
counter these plans. For opponents of the NRA,
such attitudes reveal the conspiracism they see as
underpinning the organization and they are critical
of the often apocalyptic language the NRA uses in
its mailings and public statements.
During the 1990s, the NRA was also heavily criticized for the fierce antigovernment tone of much of
its rhetoric. The NRA was particularly hostile to the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms because
of its role in the sieges of Randy Weaver at Ruby
Ridge in Idaho in 1992 and the Branch Davidians at
Waco, Texas, in 1993. A fund-raising letter sent out
by Wayne LaPierre a few days before the bombing
of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City on 19 April 1995 compared federal government agents with Nazis, for example. Former
President George Bush, Sr., resigned his life membership in the NRA in response to the letter, and
there was much criticism of the apparent overlap
between the rhetoric of the NRA and that of the
militia movement. This criticism intensified when it
was revealed that Tanya Metaksa, the head of the
NRA’s ILA, had met with members of the Michigan
Militia a few months prior to the Oklahoma bombing. LaPierre later apologized for the letter, but concern remained that the NRA was taking increasingly
extremist positions in its efforts to defend the rights
of gun owners in the United States.
D. J. Mulloy
See also: Militias; Oklahoma City Bombing; Ruby
Ridge; Waco.
References
Bruce, John M., and Clyde Wilcox, eds. 1998. The
Changing Politics of Gun Control. Lanham, MD:
Rowman and Littlefield Publishing Inc.
Davidson, Osha Gray. 1993. Under Fire: The NRA
and the Battle for Gun Control. New York: Holt.
Dizard, Jan E., et al., eds. 1999. Guns in America: A
Reader. New York: New York University Press.
Durham, Martin. 2000. The Christian Right, the Far
Right and the Boundaries of American

520

Conservatism. Manchester, England: Manchester
University Press.
LaPierre, Wayne. 1994. Guns, Crime, and Freedom.
Washington, DC: Regnery Publishing Inc.
Spitzer, Robert J. 1998. The Politics of Gun Control.
2d ed. New York: Seven Bridges Press.
Stern, Kenneth S. 1997. A Force upon the Plain: The
American Militia Movement and the Politics of
Hate. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Websites
The National Rifle Association: http://www.nra.org.
The Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence:
http://www.bradycampaign.org.

National Security Agency
The largest and most secret intelligence tool of the
United States—the National Security Agency
(NSA)—was born 24 October 1952 with President
Harry S. Truman’s signing of National Security
Directive 6. The centerpiece of the U.S. intelligence
community, NSA is a technological powerhouse
equipped with surveillance tools—both human and
computer—to intercept electronic transmissions
around the globe. The agency is engaged in collecting raw intercepts, cracking ciphered material, and
producing ciphers to protect U.S. coded communications. The NSA is home to an astonishing collection
of hyperpowerful computers, advanced mathematicians, and language experts. The NSA’s very existence
was the stuff of conspiracy theories for many years;
moreover, many of its historic activities stand alone as
conspiracies in their own right.
Size and budget set the NSA apart as the most
influential among intelligence agencies. Its annual
budget is disguised, though it measures in billions
of dollars; most NSA appropriations are hidden in
the budgets of other agencies. The NSA’s 38,000
employees occupy a compound of over sixty buildings—offices, warehouses, factories, laboratories,
and living quarters—located off a forbidden highway exit ramp in Maryland. The location itself is a
secret, and earthen embankments, thick trees, and
mazes of barbed wire guard the NSA and its activities from intrusion, either physical or visual. Motion
detectors, hydraulic antitruck devices, and tele-

National Security Agency

photo surveillance cameras work together to alert
the NSA’s paramilitary response team to any potential security compromise (Bamford 2001).
The NSA was established external to the legislative process—no law created it, and no laws govern
the scope of its responsibilities. No law prohibits the
NSA from engaging in any activity; there are only
laws to prohibit the release of any information about
the agency. The NSA’s mission and responsibilities
are unknown to anyone external to the agency,
including members of Congress. The name itself—
National Security Agency—remained a secret until
the late 1950s. “Until then its name, the identity of its
director, and even its existence were considered
more sensitive than top secret and were known only
to a handful in government” (Bamford 1982). In
addition to the conspiracy surrounding the NSA’s
existence, several of its specific operations are worthy
of note.
The Cold War
During the cold war, NSA intelligence-gathering
efforts focused on detecting the capacity and location of Soviet weapons. Listening posts along the
Soviet border failed to yield intelligence about
operations deep inside the country, so the NSA
responded by developing the U-2, a high-altitude
surveillance jet designed to fly well above the reach
of the enemy’s retaliatory capabilities. This plane
flew missions deep into the Soviet interior (at altitudes exceeding 70,000 feet) from 4 July 1956 until
1 May 1960, when Francis Gary Powers was shot
out of the Soviet sky.
Eisenhower thought it impossible for a U-2 pilot
to survive a crash; he also doubted the survivability
of the plane and its equipment. When data ceased
to be transmitted from Powers’s U-2 flight, listening
station operators assumed the plane to be destroyed
and Powers to be dead. The administration issued a
cover story to veil the true nature of the mission. To
Eisenhower’s surprise, the Soviets recovered Powers, the plane, and its intelligence payload—information intended for the NSA. When the Soviets
announced the recovery, Eisenhower and his
administration responded with a multitude of lies

and contradictory stories to protect U.S. intelligence operations. More likely, the cover-up was to
disguise Eisenhower’s hands-on role in the project.
The Vietnam War
Operation Desoto placed NSA technicians aboard
U.S. Navy destroyers to intercept radio transmissions
and radar signals at trouble spots around the globe.
In 1964 the USS Maddox was dispatched to monitor
a North Vietnamese radar installation. To ensure success, the NSA preferred that the radar station be
switched to full power at the time of the destroyer’s
passing by and a raid was staged against the island to
create the need for the radar station’s use. Assuming
the destroyer to have played some role in the incident, the North Vietnamese launched two counterattacks in the following four days. “As far as the American people and Congress knew, the North
Vietnamese had carried out purely unprovoked
attacks in . . . international waters against an American ship on peaceful patrol” (Volkman and Baggett).
An overwhelming majority in Congress immediately
approved the Tonkin Gulf Resolution; thus the NSA’s
secret war led to direct U.S. involvement in Vietnam.
Telecommunications Surveillance
“[T]here is no comprehensive ‘right to know’
included, either explicitly or implicitly, within the
First Amendment” (Volkman and Baggett). These
words of Lieutenant General William Odom, former
director of the NSA, indicate the agency’s attitude
toward individual liberty. The most egregious of NSA
activities, Operation Shamrock, was inherited at the
agency’s creation in 1952. In 1940, President Franklin D. Roosevelt issued a directive permitting the use
of electronic surveillance for national defense. This
enabled the military to work with international communications companies to obtain access to the cable
traffic of private citizens, companies, and governments. Technology quickly enabled computers to
scan this information, and the NSA incorporated the
watch lists of the CIA, FBI, Secret Service, and other
agencies into their surveillance activities.
Operation Shamrock was taken to new extremes
when Attorney General Robert Kennedy used it

521

Native Americans

against domestic targets in his crusade against organized crime. Kennedy also tracked citizens and businesses transacting with Cuba. In 1967, President
Lyndon Johnson monitored domestic dissidents
opposed to his Vietnam policies with Project
Minaret, a division of Shamrock. Under President
Jimmy Carter, the NSA listened to telephone conversations on the island of Cuba using a very large
surveillance balloon floating over the Florida Keys.
These unconstitutional activities violated the Fourth
Amendment stipulation that citizens have a right to
be free of unreasonable searches and seizures.
The NSA’s listening capabilities have reached new
highs. NSA engineers presently “work in secret to
develop computers capable of performing more than
one septillion (1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000)
operations every second” (Bamford 2001). Such
processors are necessary to handle the immense
communications traffic produced around the world
today. Considering General Odom’s words, one may
assume the NSA uses its technological capacity to
monitor conditions around the globe, including private conversations.
Jeremy L. Hall
See also: Johnson, Lyndon Baines.
References
Bamford, James. 1982. The Puzzle Palace: A Report
on America’s Most Secret Agency. Boston, MA:
Houghton Mifflin Company.
———. 2001. Body of Secrets: Anatomy of the
Ultra-Secret National Security Agency from the
Cold War through the Dawn of a New Century.
New York: Doubleday.
Volkman, Ernest, and Blaine Baggett. 1989. Secret
Intelligence. New York: Doubleday.

Native Americans
Native Americans were the featured villains in what
were probably the first non-supernatural conspiracy
fears experienced by European migrants to America.
Fear and Loathing in the American Woods
The early American frontier was in many ways a
deeply fearful place, especially in the first decades
of white settlement in any given region. Settlers
522

knew little about their new home’s existing occupants, and possessed only the sketchiest notions of
how many there were, where they lived, and what
their intentions might be. Though as many as 7 million people lived above the Rio Grande at the time
of first contact, Europeans thought of North America as, in Pilgrim leader William Bradford’s words, a
“hideous and desolate wilderness” (Nash, 23–24).
In traditional Judeo-Christian culture, wilderness
was a place to be feared rather than cherished, a
place where monsters and devils lived to test the
faith of good, civilized people. Especially among the
New England Puritans, it was commonly believed
that the Indians were devil worshippers out to do
their master’s bidding, though not actual devils themselves. (However, it was considered quite likely that
the Indians lived among real monsters, including
dragons!) Thus the expectation of confronting ultimate evil was built into the Puritans’ sense of their
“errand into the wilderness” (Nash, 23–43).
Certainly not all the colonists shared the Puritans’
high level of theological dread, but some fear of the
Indians was fairly constant and not without justification, since over the first three centuries of European
settlement, there was always some part of North
America where the natives were resisting their own
conquest and displacement. This resistance often
took the form of a raiding style of warfare that was
intended to spread terror and usually preferred
striking at weakly defended targets, like an outlying
cabin or an isolated outpost. Always seeking ways of
fighting that minimized their own casualties, Indian
war leaders were not above using devious tactics
such as ambushes, sneak attacks, and feigning
peaceful intentions. One of the great Indian victories during Pontiac’s Rebellion (or War or Conspiracy, depending on your point of view) of 1763, the
Ojibways’ triumph over the British at Ft. Michilimackinac was accomplished by lulling the soldiers
into complacency with a friendly game of ball. The
Indian players hit the ball into the open gates of the
fort, chased after it, then suddenly attacked with
weapons the Ojibway women had smuggled inside
the post while the whites were watching the game.
Though the European armies of the Early Modern Period were no slouches at wreaking death and

Native Americans

destruction on the civilian population, Indian warfare was perceived as particularly and intimately
awful. In some ways Indians were better at distinguishing their targets than whites were—the French
were often spared in raids on European outposts—
but their military customs made few allowances for
noncombatants. Indian massacre stories invariably
featured a scene in which a warrior tore an infant
from her mother’s arms and dashed her head against
a hearth or a tree; this became a cliché, but by no
means one without a basis in reality. Numerous
common practices of Indian warfare haunted the
dreams of European settlers, soldiers, and officials,
especially the scalping or other mutilation of victims’
bodies and the taking of captives to be assimilated
into Indian society.
(It should be noted that whites fighting Indians
made few such allowances themselves, and showed
far less interest than the Indians in taking captives.
Nevertheless, white attacks on Indian villages were
called “raids” or “battles,” while successful Indian
attacks on white settlements or military posts were
termed “massacres.”)
This fear of assimilation by an alien, collectively
minded society, a recurrent theme in the annals of
American conspiracy theory, has one of its roots in
tales of captivity among the Indians. Some of the
stories even admitted what historians have found to
be true, that many captives, especially women and
children, were successfully assimiliated, and
showed little desire to return to European ways.
Ever more lurid Indian captivity narratives became
a staple of American popular culture, and perhaps
its first unique contribution to world literature.
The earlier comment about Indians haunting settlers’ dreams should be taken quite literally. Recent
interpretations of the 1692 Salem witchcraft crisis
have emphasized the role of New England’s lateseventeenth-century Indian wars (1675–1678 and
1688–1691) in generating the psychological stress
and supernatural fears that exploded in Massachusetts. A large number of the accusers had some direct
or immediate family experience with the Indian wars,
and those who didn’t had probably read Mary Rowlandson’s popular, then recently published book on
her experience as a captive during the earlier conflict,

King Philip’s War. The witchcraft evil was thought to
have first come from Indian powwows in the forest,
and the devil appeared to several Massachusetts
women as “a thing like an Indian,” or “a Tawny man”
(McWilliams, 589, 594–95). Accuser Mary Toothaker
of Billerica finally admitted under questioning that
she had lashed out because she was “troubled w’h
feare about the Indians, & used to dream of fighting
with them.” Toothaker claimed to have signed up
with the devil herself because he had “promised to
keep her from the Indians” (McWilliams, 595).
At least these colonial New Englanders had some
direct or nearly direct experience of the Indians
they feared so much. In later centuries, far more
white Americans eagerly consumed Indian atrocity
stories around the family table and in popular literature and newspapers than ever interacted with
Indians or witnessed an Indian raid. Given the
emphasis placed on the depredations of “murderous savages” in their information about the Indians,
it is perhaps not surprising that nineteenth-century
migrants heading to the Pacific coast on the Overland Trail brought hair-trigger emotions to all their
thoughts and actions concerning Indians. Many
reported their scalps itching at the very thought of
Indians. Most westering travelers suffered “far
more,” according to historian Glenda Riley, “from
their own anxieties what could happen to them than
from what actually did happen” (Riley, 427–428).
Unfortunately, the Indians themselves did suffer,
at the hands of settlers who were easily panicked
into acts of violence and prejudice, and eager to
support harsh government policies against Indians,
having learned to deal with their anxieties by fearing and hating the natives.
The Myth of the Superchief
Although it would be stretching the definition of conspiracy theory to include all fears of Indian attack in
this category, much of what settlers, soldiers, and
government officials believed about the Indians certainly does qualify. Whites often became convinced
that the Indians of different villages, tribes, and languages were leagued against them, and secretly plotting mayhem even when relations were peaceful and
friendly. In some respects, a conspiracy model of
523

Native Americans

Conspiracy of Pontiac. (Library of Congress)

Indian behavior came naturally to Europeans, who
struggled to understand or even perceive the complex cultural, social, and political distinctions among
the various Indian groups they encountered. As with
many cross-cultural conspiracy theories, it was easy
to move from lumping all Indians together culturally
to believing that all Indians were working together
against the colonists.
This pattern emerged even before the beginning
of permanent settlement. The leaders of the 1585
lost colony of Roanoke abandoned their island off
the coast of present North Carolina out of a belief
that Pemisapan, the weroance of the local Indian
village, had organized a region-wide conspiracy,
involving many tribes, to starve and then wipe out
the colony. According to historian Michael Oberg,
Pemisapan had probably done nothing more than
524

“grown weary of an intolerant, violent, contagious,
and dependent people” (83), and, quite understandably, moved his village off Roanoke Island to a
more congenial neighborhood. Even so, colony
commander Ralph Lane led a force that brought
back the weroance’s head, the culmination of a pattern of precipitous, threatening actions by Lane.
“No conspiracy is needed,” writes Oberg, to explain
the growing hostility of the region’s Indians to the
Roanoke colony (82). The English settlement
abruptly shifted locations after Pemisapan’s death,
and disappeared completely a few years after that.
Pemisapan represents the original version of two
ideas that became standard parts of conspiracy theories about the Indians: the Indian mastermind or
monarch in control of tens of thousands of warriors,
and the unfaithful Indian ally or convert. From
“Pemisapan’s Conspiracy” on, serious or widespread
Indian resistance was usually attributed by Europeans and later chroniclers to the machinations of
some preternaturally brilliant, all-powerful “superchief” (Bourne, 202). This analysis may have been
somewhat accurate for the Powhatan Indian rebellions against Virginia in 1622 and 1644, which almost
destroyed the colony and are generally thought to be
the work of the war chief turned paramount chief
Opechanacanough, Pocahontas’s uncle, and the
reputed power behind her father Powhatan’s throne.
The reputations of most other putative Indian
masterminds were built on much shakier foundations. In many cases, a widespread conflict was
blamed on someone who was really only a major figure in some critical early encounter, or promoted
himself as the primary conspirator in a later treaty
with the white authorities.
For instance, New England propagandists depicted their apocalyptic, region-wide Indian war of
1675–1678 as the work of Philip, sachem of
Pokanoket, whom they dubbed “King Philip” to reemphasize their claim that the conflict was, as Russell
Bourne puts it, “not a series of separate raids by provoked people but a brilliantly orchestrated war, conducted by a devilish military genius” (Bourne, 118).
Besides personalizing the conflict as conspiracy theories so often do, this conspiratorial view of the New
England Indians’ resistance was a political and ethi-

Native Americans

cal convenience for whites, who were authorized by
their belief in this evil plot to ignore the role of their
own behavior in the Indians’ unrest, take extreme
measures against tribes whose land rights conflicted
with their ambitions, and to declare the problem
solved when the designated villain was eliminated.
Philip (who changed his name from Metacom
when he became sachem) was the son of Massassoit,
the Indian chief who had befriended the Pilgrims
and allowed their Plymouth Colony to survive. Relations had deteriorated after Massassoit’s death as the
local fur trade dried up and agricultural settlement
expanded, bringing livestock that consumed the
Indians’ open-field crops and forcing them into economic dependence upon whites. Philip and his people also chafed under Plymouth’s unequal laws,
which had recently been used to try to hang three of
Philip’s followers. Plymouth leaders coveted the
Pokanokets’ land, and eagerly accepted rumors circulated against Philip by the sachem’s Indian political rivals, to the effect the sachem planned a major
war, possibly in concert with the French. When
Philip was recorded at a meeting with Rhode Island
officials complaining about his people’s mistreatment by Plymouth, and vowing that he was “determined not to live until I have no country” (Bourne,
107), the mantle of conspiratorial mastermind was
fitted and ready to be forced on him.
Philip was thought to be seeking the extermination of New England’s white population. The
Pokanokets did begin hostilities with a much exaggerated raid on the nearby town of Swansea, but
Philip himself spent the war running while the Narragansetts, Abenakis, and other tribes around New
England did most of the fighting. He nevertheless
always remained New England’s primary target,
and by the end of the war, his village had vanished,
his wife and son had been sold into slavery, and his
dismembered body was on display in the town of
Plymouth.
Pontiac played a similarly inflated role in accounts
of the 1763 “conspiracy” that bears his name. An
obscure Odawa war leader (not a chief), Pontiac
touched off a frontier-wide uprising but actually led
only one phase of it, the failed siege of Ft. Detroit.
Both he and the British tried to advance their inter-

ests in the aftermath of the war, concluding a peace
treaty that bolstered British claims to the TransAppalachian West and acknowledged Pontiac an
Indian potentate, but probably got the former rebel
assassinated as a traitor to the Indian cause. As they
had long done with the alleged “conquests” of the
Iroquois “Empire,” the British authorities and the
Anglo-American colonists exaggerated Pontiac’s
power and status in ways that magnified both the
military threat he posed and the glory and power
that accrued to those who had pacified him. The
operative theory regarding Pontiac and many other
superchiefs was well expressed in “Ponteach, or the
Savages of America,” a drama published in 1766 by
French and Indian War hero Robert Rogers.
Rogers’s Ponteach is a haughty forest emperor laid
tragically low by his pride. “This Country’s mine, and
here I reign as King,” a king whose “Empire’s measured only by the Sun,” the character asserts in
explaining his disdain for British authority (Rogers,
128, 144).
In fact, it is unlikely that general Indian uprisings
could ever have been the work of a single conspiratorial mastermind, or even a knot of them. The
primitive nature of the available means of communication alone—symbolic war belts of clamshell
beads (“wampum”) were used to coordinate the
1763 risings—precluded any sort of command and
control. Conspiracies were unlikely for more fundamental cultural reasons as well. Most North American Indian tribes lacked any sort of true chief executive who could impose his will on his followers. A
chief, unlike a European general, governor, or king,
drew his power not from law or force, but only from
the respect and love that his prowess, wisdom, and
generosity had garnered among his people, who
could obey him or not as they chose.
The superchief mythology, from the exaggerations
of the leader’s influence and the depth of his scheming to the popular dramas (and often place names)
that celebrated his nobility in defeat, was applied
successively to every significant Indian resistance
leader after Pontiac, from John Logan of the 1774
Lord Dunmore’s War (immortalized in Thomas Jefferson’s Notes on Virginia for his oratorical prowess)
to Tecumseh, Black Hawk, and Osceola in the early
525

Native Americans

nineteenth century and, in a somewhat less conspiratorial vein, to such far western Indian rebels as
Cochise, Geronimo, Sitting Bull, and Crazy Horse. It
was applied retroactively to Philip in one of the antebellum era’s most popular plays, “Metamora.”
The celebrity that the superchief myth brought
all of these men should not obscure how damaging
it was to Indian people when they were still struggling to stay in their homelands. In their time, the
names of all of these leaders were capable of plunging whole frontiers into panic, and such panics usually brought on white military campaigns that would
be followed by the expropriation of Indian lands.
“Our Most Dangerous Enemies”:
Indian Converts and Allies as
Victims of Conspiracy Fears
Far more harmful than the “superchief” myth, in
terms of the brutality it inspired in whites, was the
related conspiracy theory that all Indians alike were
actual or potential enemies, no matter what attitude
they professed to hold toward whites. Even Indians
who had become Christians, pursued white occupations, and lived peaceably near white towns for
decades were treated as likely traitors, spies, and
saboteurs.
Since the beginning of European contact, the colonizers had been urging the natives to lay down their
weapons, adopt European ways of life, and convert
to the Christian religion. Most Indians resisted this
pressure when they could, but for many resistance
became impossible once European settlement had
engulfed their homelands. Some responded to the
urgings of Christian missionaries and adopted the
faith, while others sought to simply live as quietly as
they could, at peace with the settlers or even joining
in the whites’ battles with other Indians. In most of
the colonies, then, there were at least small communities of peaceful and often Christian Indians living
near white towns and farms. In times of general
Indian conspiracy scares, these communities became
deeply suspicious to whites, and often suffered as
much or more than the tribes actually engaged in
hostilities.
The residents of Puritan missionary John Eliot’s
“praying towns” discovered this during King Philip’s
526

War. Stories circulated of “Praying Indians” joining
in raids on Christian towns and spying for the rebels.
According to historian Jenny Hale Pulsipher, “The
English were quick to believe tales of Christian
Indian perfidy,” and the burning of English barns or
haystacks “became pretexts for English violence
against the praying towns” (Pulsipher, 475). The
Christian Indians at Wamesit had to abandon their
village and food supplies in late 1675 after furious
English militiamen fired on them without warning
on two separate occasions, in one incident wounding
a number of women and children, a twelve-year-old
fatally. Various Puritan commentators questioned
the sincerity of Indian religious conversions and
depicted the “Praying Indians” as contemptible
mockeries of Christianity. Sometimes with and
sometimes without official approval, New England
troops sacked the villages of Indian Christians and
Indian allies. Meanwhile, the authorities shut down
many praying towns and interned numerous friendly
natives on barren Deer Island in Boston Harbor.
Some praying Indians even shared the fate of
Philip’s family, enslavement in the Caribbean.
Other groups of peaceful Christian Indians were
visited by some of the worst atrocities in the annals
of European-Indian relations in North America.
The infamous Paxton Boys massacre, for instance,
was part of the fallout from the conspiracy theories
surrounding Pontiac. The Pennsylvania frontier had
been wracked by Indian raids both during the 1763
rebellion and the French and Indian War that preceded it. There were a number of Christian Indian
villages in the colony, including Conestoga, where a
handful of people eked out a meager living selling
bowls and baskets. Looking for payback and charging that some of the Conestoga men had fought
with Pontiac, a number of men from the town of
Paxton, on the Susquehanna River in east-central
Pennsylvania, concluded that these supposedly
friendly Indians amounted to a “Basket & Broommaking Bandittey” who were “in Reality our most
dangerous enemies” (Merrell, 286).
A week and a half before Christmas, 1763, fiftyfour Scots-Irish men from Paxton rode to Conestoga, and shot and hacked to death six Indians
they found there, allegedly in revenge for Pontiac’s

Native Americans

Rebellion. Local authorities gathered the surviving
Conestogas (who had been lucky enough to be out)
and placed them in a workhouse for protection. The
men from Paxton soon rode in and killed the rest.
Far from horrifying their fellow Pennsylvanians,
the “Paxton Boys” found themselves at the head of a
popular cause. Their numbers swelled with new
recruits, the Paxton Boys rode down to Philadelphia,
in arms, to take some Christian Delaware Indians
being protected there and topple the government
itself if necessary. A manifesto was issued in which
the supposedly Quaker-dominated government of
Pennsylvania was charged with being insensitive to
frontier needs because it was too soft on the Indians.
A poem called “The Cloven Foot Discovered” (Parkman, 716) expressed the settlers’ view that whites
who gave sympathy or aid to any Indians were traitors to their fellow colonists and fellow travelers of
the Indians’ secret plots against the frontier settlements:
Go, good Christians, never spare
To give your Indians Clothes to wear
Send ’em good Beef, and Pork, and Bread,
Guns, Powders, Flints, and Stores of Lead,
To Shoot Your Neighbours Through the Head; . . .
Encourage every friendly Savage
To murder, burn, destroy, and ravage.

Only some fast talking by leading Pennsylvania
politician Benjamin Franklin finally defused the
Paxton Boys situation, but not before more than
fifty of the “protected” Christian Delawares died of
diseases in the city.
Time and again in early America, peaceful Christian Indians found that the most dangerous place to
be was anywhere near their supposed allies and coreligionists, the Anglo-American settlers. No matter
how devout a Christian and firmly committed to
peace and friendship with whites a group of Indians
might be, many settlers assumed all Indians were
secretly conspiring against them, and in the right
circumstances might slaughter whatever Indians
they happened to run across. The biggest problem
that the young United States had in recruiting
Indian allies during the Revolutionary War was the

fact that pro-American chiefs kept getting killed by
American soldiers.
By far the most heinous example of intentional
“friendly fire” on Indians during the Revolution can
be found in a 1782 incident that came to be known
as the Gnadenhutten massacre, in present eastcentral Ohio. The “Ohio Country” was a bitter battleground between the British and Indians on the
one hand, and the settlers just south of the Ohio
River in Kentucky on the other. German American
missionaries from a sect called the Moravians had
converted large numbers of Delaware Indians who
lived in this area to Christianity and kept them on
the American side. The Moravians were pacifists, so
once converted these Indians did not even believe
in fighting.
The Christian Indians of Gnadenhutten happened
to be harvesting their corn one day in 1782 when a
war party of American settlers appeared. They were
pursuing some hostile Indians who had been seen in
the area. The settlers charged the friendly villagers of
Gnadenhutten with being warriors, pointing to the
existence of European implements, such as axes,
spoons, and tea kettles, in this village of Indians who
had adopted white lifestyles, as evidence they had
killed and stolen from whites. On the strength of this
flimsy evidence, the Gnadenhutten Indians were
sentenced to death. They spent the night praying to
the European God, and in the morning the settlers
dragged the Indians out of their cabins in groups of
two or three and executed them with a mallet so as
not to waste ammunition.
These sorts of incidents often turned white suspicions about Christian and friendly Indians into
self-fulfilling prophecies. With friends like the
American settlers, many Indians reasoned, who
needed enemies? During wars and war scares with
neighboring colonial powers like Great Britain,
France, and Spain, most Indians with any access to
the “foreign” power were quite willing to work with
them against the settlers and/or the United States if
they possibly could, though the Indians’ fondest
desire was always to be left relatively independent
of any European power.
Colonial and U.S. officials frequently turned this
rational pattern of Indian behavior into the basis of
527

Native Americans

another sort of conspiracy theory, of the Indians as
cat’s-paws of foreigners out to split off pieces of their
territory or curb American expansion. Andrew Jackson first made a name for himself by brutally precluding the possibility that the southeastern Indians
might collaborate with the Spanish or British to
block the United States from accessing the Gulf
Coast and its ports. This was the basic aim of his
campaigns against the Creeks, the British, and the
Seminoles between 1813 and 1818, which began
with a settler panic about a “massacre” at Ft. Mims
in Alabama, and ended with the summary execution
of two British citizens and an Indian religious leader
and the forcible U.S. annexation of Spanish Florida.
But at least Jackson’s enemies were genuinely
hostile to the United States. Unfortunately, the mistreatment of friendly and Christian Indians continued long after the point had passed when Indians
posed any real threat to the United States and even
in cases where they could hardly have done more to
demonstrate their loyalty. Perhaps the most egregious example of many occurred in Civil War era
Minnesota. A group of Winnebago Indians, previously removed by the government from their Wisconsin homeland, were living peacefully in the manner of white farmers in the area around Blue Earth.
When a Sioux uprising broke out in 1862, the Winnebago were forced out of their homes as a security
threat, and sent to a new reservation in a barren section of present Nebraska. The Winnebago had no
connection to the Sioux outbreak, and could not
have made much of a military contribution to it in
any case, since most of the fighting-age Winnebago
men were serving in the Union army at the time.
The Winnebago veterans would find no homes to
return to after the war. At that point, many of them
doubtless wished they had been conspiring against
the United States.
Jeffrey L. Pasley
See also: Pontiac, Chief; Salem Witch Trials.
References
Berkhofer Robert J., Jr. 1979. The White Man’s
Indian: Images of the American Indian from
Columbus to the Present. New York: Vintage
Books.

528

Bird, S. Elizabeth, ed. 1996. Dressing in Feathers:
The Construction of the American Indian in
American Popular Culture. Boulder: Westview
Press.
Bourne, Russell. 1991. The Red King’s Rebellion:
Racial Politics in New England, 1675–1678. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Bross, Kristina. 1999. “‘That Epithet of Praying’:
The Vilification of Praying Indians during King
Philip’s War.” Pp. 53–67 in Fear Itself: Enemies
Real and Imagined in American Culture, ed.
Nancy Lusignan Schultz. West Lafayette, IN:
Purdue University Press.
Coward, John M. 1999. The Newspaper Indian:
Native American Identity in the Press, 1820–90.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Davis, Karl. 2002. “‘Remember Fort Mims’:
Reinterpreting the Origins of the Creek War.”
Journal of the Early Republic 22: 611–636.
Dowd, Gregory Evans. 1990. “The French King
Wakes Up in Detroit: Pontiac’s War in Rumor and
History.” Ethnohistory 37: 254–278.
———. 1996. “The Panic of 1751: The Significance
of Rumor on the South Carolina–Cherokee
Frontier.” William and Mary Quarterly, 3d ser.
53: 527–560.
Heidler, David S., and Jeanne T. Heidler. 1996. Old
Hickory’s War: Andrew Jackson and the Quest for
Empire. Mechanicburg, PA: Stackpole Books.
Jennings, Francis. 1984. The Ambiguous Iroquois
Empire: The Covenant Chain Confederation of
Indian Tribes with English Colonies from Its
Beginnings to the Lancaster Treaty of 1744. New
York: W. W. Norton & Co.
Lurie, Nancy Oestreich. 1978. “Winnebago.” Pp.
690–707 in Handbook of North American
Indians, Vol. 15, Northeast, ed. Bruce G. Trigger.
Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.
McConnell, Michael N. 1997. A Country Between:
The Upper Ohio Valley and Its Peoples,
1724–1774. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska
Press.
McWilliams, John. 1996. “Indian John and the
Northern Tawnies.” New England Quarterly 69:
580–604.
Merrell, James H. 1999. Into the American Woods:
Negotiators on the Pennsylvania Frontier. New
York: Norton.
Namias, June. 1993. White Captives: Gender and
Ethnicity on the American Frontier. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press.
Nash, Roderick. 1982. Wilderness and the American
Mind. 3d ed. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Nativism

Norton, Mary Beth. 2002. In the Devil’s Snare: The
Salem Witchcraft Crisis of 1692. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf.
Oberg, Michael L. 1994. “Indians and Englishmen
at the First Roanoke Colony: A Note on
Pemisapan’s Conspiracy, 1585–86.” American
Indian Culture and Research Journal 18: 75–89.
Parkman, Francis. 1991. The Oregon Trail, The
Conspiracy of Pontiac. New York: Library of
America (Literary Classics of the United States).
Parmenter, Jon William. 1997. “Pontiac’s War:
Forging New Links in the Anglo-Iroquois
Covenant Chain, 1758–1766.” Ethnohistory 44:
617–654.
Pulsipher, Jenny Hale. 1996. “Massacre at
Hurtleberry Hill: Christian Indians and English
Authority in Metacom’s War.” William and Mary
Quarterly, 3d ser. 53: 459–486.
Richter, Daniel K. 1992. The Ordeal of the
Longhouse: The Peoples of the Iroquois League in
the Era of European Colonization. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press.
Riley, Glenda. 1984. “The Specter of a Savage:
Rumors and Alarmism on the Overland Trail.”
Western Historical Quarterly 15: 427–444.
Rogers, Robert. 1766. “Ponteach: Or the Savages of
America. A Tragedy.” Reprinted in Representative
Plays by American Dramatists, 1765–1819, ed.
Montrose J. Moses. New York: Benjamin Blom.
White, Richard. 1991. The Middle Ground: Indians,
Empires, and Republics in the Great Lakes
Region, 1650–1815. Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge
University Press.

Nativism
At its height in the nineteenth century, nativism was
the often conspiratorial hostility of white, nativeborn, Protestant Americans to European immigrants that, at times, was embodied in political
movements and evolved into genuinely exclusionist
policies. In the 1850s, a burgeoning coalition of selfproclaimed nativists swept into office and called for
radical change. During the nineteenth century, the
perception of immigrants shifted from welcome to
demonization, usually depending on whether the
United States was going through economic expansion or stagnation. From the start, immigration and
the resulting competition, whether religious, class,

or racial, between ethnic groups became a key issue
in the development of the United States, and one
that was frequently expressed in the rhetoric of conspiracy theory.
Historically, immigration falls into three periods:
colonial and eighteenth century; “Old” in the first
half of the nineteenth century; and “New” starting in
the 1880s. The decade from 1845 to 1854 saw the
greatest proportionate influx of immigrants in U.S.
history. By 1860 more than one out of every eight
Americans was foreign-born, with the most numerous being Irish, German, and English immigrants.
Each period generated its own kind of nativist reaction, from Know-Nothingism (the openly nativist
political party of the 1840s and 1850s), to anti-immigration laws (the first being the Chinese Exclusion
Act of 1882, culminating in the closing of the gates
through the National Origins Acts of 1921 and 1924).
It is important to note, however, that openness to
immigration has remained the majority opinion, for
in Tom Paine’s words, the United States was to be
“an asylum for the persecuted lovers of civil and
religious liberty” from all parts of the world.
In the colonial period, although ethnic mixture
was the reality, with a majority white population living alongside an Indian and a black group of African
origin, the white group was very heterogeneous in
its composition. The majority were of English origin
but many were Dutch, French Huguenots, German, and Scots-Irish, which created frictions. For
instance, in the Massachusetts colony, the Puritans
did all they could not to admit non-English settlers.
In spite of the reality of ethnic plurality, the global
perception was that of Englishness. Hence, after
the Revolution, the 60 percent of English origin in
the white community took political power and set
the tune culturally.
Early nativism was marked by a belief in total
assimilation, the giving up of one’s former culture,
language, and behavior to be blended into a new
identity, that of an American, as celebrated by Hector Saint John de Crèvecoeur, who glorified the land
of limitless opportunities to all newcomers (the
“melting-pot” theory). The asylum tradition was promoted through the 1790 Naturalization Act, which

529

Nativism

made it possible for virtually anybody to be admitted
and naturalized into a citizen. However, this “generous” act contained limitations; only “free white persons” who had resided in the United States for at
least two years were eligible for naturalization.
Hence, from the start, the reality of social and political exclusion—of blacks and Indians—paved the
way for future exclusions.
The self-image of hospitality was seriously tested
at the time of the 1798 Alien and Sedition Acts,
which gave the president arbitrary countersubversive powers to exclude or deport any foreigner
deemed to be dangerous, and to prosecute anybody
publishing or writing in “a false, scandalous and
malicious nature” about the president or Congress.
The government was reacting against European
radicals whose political activities were considered
subversive. The Naturalization Act was amended to
provide for a fourteen-year residency requirement
for prospective citizens; in 1802, Congress reduced
the waiting period to five years, a provision that
remains in effect today.
Anti-Catholicism
In the following decades, most immigrants entering
the United States were Roman Catholics (one-third
of all immigrants between 1830 and 1840 were from
Catholic Ireland), and so ethnic prejudice against
immigrants was also usually accompanied by conspiracy-mongering against Catholicism. Since the
colonial period, Americans had come to identify
themselves as a Protestant nation, and many leading
Protestant clergymen had cautioned the country
against a papal plot to destroy U.S. liberty and society.
In the nineteenth century this conspiratorial tradition fed into nativism in a variety of forms: exclusive nativist clubs and fraternities such as the Order
of United Americans or the United Sons of America;
and political parties, especially when the social and
economic situation was bleak, as in the late 1830s,
the early 1840s, and the mid-1850s. These groups
attracted middle-class Protestants, members of the
two “traditional” parties (Democratic and Whig),
and working-class voters who resented what they
considered to be the job competition from immigrants, the increase in crime, public drunkenness,
530

and pauperism, and the manipulation of immigrant
voters.
More significant was the proliferation of nativist
propaganda. Prompted by the news of an Austrian
Catholic missionary society sending money and men
to the United States, Samuel F. B. Morse, a distinguished professor of sculpture and painting at New
York University, wrote A Foreign Conspiracy
against the Liberties of the United States (1834) and
he went on to publish The Imminent Dangers to the
Free Institutions of the United States (1835), both of
which involved denunciations of the Catholic conspiracy against the United States. Lyman Beecher, a
seventh-generation clergyman and president of
Lane Theological Seminary in Cincinnati, published
A Plea for the West in 1835, in which he exposed the
alleged plot by the pope to build a “Vatican” in the
West by sending hordes of Catholic settlers there.
However, perhaps the most effective was the “Uncle
Tom’s Cabin” of nativism, the Awful Disclosures of
Maria Monk, which sold 300,000 in 1836. Monk told
of her alleged experiences with Catholicism, which
involved forced sexual intercourse with priests and
the murdering of nuns and children. Although her
mother denied the legitimacy of her work, stating
that Maria never belonged to the nunnery and that
a brain injury her daughter received as a child could
be the cause of her stories, the book was widely
accepted as truth. In 1841, the Vindicator was published by Rev. W. C. Brownlee, the leader of the
New York Protestant Association. In the same year,
there was growing concern in New York State that
Catholics were gaining influence in schools because
of the action of Archbishop John Hughes of New
York. He was seeking to obtain state aid for Catholic
schools, which was interpreted as both a subversive
plot against the First Amendment, and a refusal by
Catholics to attend public schools and be assimilated. In 1842, the American Protestant Association
was founded by 100 Clergymen in Philadelphia to
oppose Catholics.
This propaganda led to agitation, rioting, and
mobbing. Although Catholics occasionally reacted
to the nativist movement with violence, nativists
instigated the greater part of those violent acts. In
Boston, there were numerous riots in 1823, 1826,

Nativism

and 1829. In May 1832, these potentially explosive
conditions produced a riot at a New York Protestant Association meeting. Further, while addressing a Baltimore Baptist audience in 1834, a group
of Catholics attacked a Baptist speaker. On 10
August 1834 a mob of forty to fifty people gathered
outside of the Ursuline Convent School at
Charlestown, near Boston, and burned it to the
ground. Although eight people were arrested and
tried, only one was sentenced to life imprisonment.
This rather lenient sentence, together with the lack
of condemnation in moderate Protestant circles,
shows how widespread hostility to Catholics had
become. The violence continued into the following
decade when, for example, thirty people were
killed and hundreds injured during nativist riots in
Philadelphia in 1844.
Political Nativism
Anti-Catholicism gradually evolved into a political
crusade. In 1844, James Harper founded the American Republican Party in order to break the deadlock between the Whig and Democratic Parties in
New York State, and offer another approach to politics. It allied with the Whigs, which resulted in the
defeat of the Democratic Party. The American
Republican Party demonstrated the political relevance of the nativist movement and paved the way
for the entrance of the Know-Nothings into the
national political scene as the only coherent organization to rest its political action on hostility to immigration and to Catholics.
The American Party had its origins in 1849 in New
York. At first a secret society called the Order of the
Star-Spangled Banner, it became a formal party in
1853, and its members were dubbed the KnowNothings (after their refusal to answer questions
about their involvement) by Horace Greeley, a
famous newspaper editor. By the middle of the 1850s
the party ranked over a million members across the
country. At the local level, in the 1854 election, the
Know-Nothings won six governorships and controlled legislatures in Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Pennsylvania,
Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, and California,
where they passed discriminatory laws against immi-

Samuel F. B. Morse. (Library of Congress)

grants, including the first literacy tests for voting, in
order to disenfranchise the Irish. The party’s platform focused on voting rights, stretching the residency period before naturalization from five to
twenty-one years, and requiring the exclusion of foreigners and Catholics from public office. After the
defeat of their candidate in the presidential election
of 1856, the Know-Nothings were split by their
inability to overcome the slavery issue. They lost
influence and were absorbed into the expanding
Republican Party, formed in 1854. However, another
important factor in their decline was that not all
Americans opposed the arrival of new immigrants
because they were much needed by industrialists,
railroad builders, and other businessmen as unskilled
labor willing to accept lower wages.
531

Nativism

Exclusion or Americanization?
After the Civil War, “new immigrants” from southern
and central Europe, even more numerous and alien,
increased the demonological anxiety of the nativeborn, which led to numerous conflicts and a radical
reexamination of the country’s immigration policy.
From 1880 to 1930 a total of 25 million newcomers
entered the United States. The more numerous were
Italians, Jews, and Slavs—totaling more than 9 million—who brought in new customs, manners, languages, and religions. To this flow of immigration
one should add the massive black migration to the
North. All these groups were scattered throughout
the country but they tended to flock together in big
cities, especially in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and New England.
In this era of laissez-faire capitalism, nativism
evolved into the fear that class conflict would destroy
the social fabric of the United States. Mounting
labor organization, and the importation of socialist
and anarchist ideologies by immigrants, rekindled
the conspiracy theories. The violent strikes of the
1870s and 1880s were therefore seen as signs of
forthcoming disaster. In this climate, the American
Protective Association was organized as a secret society dedicated to eradicating “foreign despotism,”
which included Catholics. One of its aims was to ban
German-language instruction.
Nativism took on a special coloring in the West,
where the fear was of Chinese immigrants, considered a threat to white workers because they accepted
lower wages. The Workingmen’s Party led a movement for a new state constitution in California in
1878 and 1879 that included stringent discriminatory
measures. At the national level, riots and mobbing,
especially in Wyoming and New York, led to mounting pressure by California and other western states
on Congress to pass the nation’s first immigration
restriction, which some commentators have viewed
as the institutionalization of racial paranoia. In 1882,
the Chinese Exclusion Act excluded the Chinese
from naturalization and immigration. More restrictions were introduced in 1892, and Chinese immigration was banned permanently in 1902. In 1906
the first English language requirements for naturalization were enacted. The U.S. government legis532

lated gradually to close the doors by limiting Japanese immigration through the Gentlemen’s Agreement of 1907–1908. In the 1917 Immigration Law,
Congress enacted a literacy requirement for all new
immigrants and designated Asia as a “barred zone”
(excepting Japan and the Philippines). The 1921
National Origins Act inaugurated the quota system,
by which admissions from each European country
was limited to 3 percent of each foreign-born nationality in the 1910 census. It effectively favored northern Europeans at the expense of southern and eastern Europeans and Asians. The 1924 Johnson-Reed
Act can be considered as a perfect application of
nativist concerns for racial homogeneity since it confirmed that immigration quotas were based on the
ethnic makeup of the U.S. population as a whole in
1920.
It was not until 1965 that racial criteria were removed from U.S. immigration legislation. An
annual quota of 20,000 was awarded to each country, regardless of ethnicity, under a ceiling of
170,000. Up to 120,000 were allowed to immigrate
from Western Hemisphere nations, not subject to
quotas (until 1976).
Meanwhile, at the end of the nineteenth century
in the wake of the Progressive movement, the muckrakers, social workers, and social reformers drew the
public’s attention to the poverty, disease, and crime
rates of immigrant ghettos. Moreover, they sought to
bridge the gap between newcomers and native-born
Americans. The “new immigrants” were less skilled,
less educated, more clannish, and slower to learn
English. However, in order to cope with their new
life, immigrants tended to organize into minority
societies, trying to preserve as much of the group’s
culture as possible. But growing concern for national
homogeneity urged many to think that a campaign
to “Americanize”—meaning assimilation—was necessary. Thus the Bureau of Americanization was created to encourage employers to make English
classes compulsory for their foreign-born workers.
For example, in the Ford Motor Company School,
the first thing an immigrant was asked to learn to say
was, “I am an American.” Most states banned
schooling in other tongues; some even prohibited
the study of foreign languages in the elementary

Neo-Nazis

grades, in the belief that public schools were the
major tool for Americanization.
English Only?
The global trend since Word War II has been to
diminish discrimination, at least by statute, and to
reduce prejudice against immigrants and members
of ethnic minorities. Hostility certainly lost much
of its conspiracy-minded intensity, with the combined effects of the civil rights movement and the
struggle by Hispanics and Native Americans for
equal rights. However, the end of racial quotas in
1965 led many Third World people to enter the
United States, especially those coming from Central and South America, which alarmed many
Americans and gave new targets to nativism, especially in the states where those immigrants tended
to flock together. The question of bilingualism then
became the central issue of nativists. In the 1980s
the “English only” movement was launched to
restrict the language of government to English and
encourage immigrants to learn English. Illegal immigration was another element that encouraged
nativist anxieties, as encapsulated in President
Ronald Reagan’s declaration in 1984 that “we have
lost control of our own borders.” Illegal immigrants
were seen as a threat to native-born workers and an
obstacle to unions, as they were enjoying all the
advantages of living in America (schools, hospitals,
welfare benefits) while escaping all the drawbacks,
like taxes.
However, no legislation managed to curb the
number of “undocumented” aliens on U.S. territory.
In California, another upsurge of activism took place
in the 1990s due to economic stagnation, rising
racial tensions, and the widening gap between the
rich and the poor. Voters approved Proposition 187,
which was meant to force public agencies (schools,
police, and social and health services) to find out the
immigration status of supposedly undocumented
aliens, and report them to the immigration authorities. The initiative was judged unconstitutional.
However, a direct consequence was the enactment
by Congress of legislation toughening immigration
enforcement laws.
Aïssatou Sy-Wonyu

See also: Anti-Catholicism; Anti-Masonic Party;
Antisemitism; Eugenics; Japanese Americans; KnowNothings, Ku Klux Klan; Red Scare; Sacco and
Vanzetti.
References
Bennett, David. 1988. The Party of Fear: From
Nativist Movements to the New Right in
American History. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press.
Cose, Ellis. 1992. A Nation of Strangers: Prejudice,
Politics, and the Populating of America. New
York: Morrow.
Dinnerstein, Leonard, Roger L. Nichols, and David
M. Reimers. 1996. Natives and Strangers: A
Multicultural History of Americans. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Handlin, Oscar. 1957. Race and Nationality in
American Life. Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
Higham, John. 1988. Strangers in the Land: Patterns
of American Nativism, 1860–1925. 2d ed. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Jones, Maldwyn Allen. 1992. American Immigration.
2d ed. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Lee, John Hancock. 1970. The Origin and the
Progress of the American Party in Politics. New
York: Books for Libraries Press.
Leonard, Ira M., and Robert D. Parmet. 1971.
American Nativism, 1830–1860. New York: Van
Nostrand Reinhold.

Neo-Nazis
Along with other right-wing hate groups, neo-Nazis
have drawn on the rhetoric of conspiracy to frame
their analysis of global and U.S. politics. Although
overshadowed by the stronger tradition of the religious Right in the United States, various neo-Nazi
organizations contributed to the wider cluster of
antisemitic and white supremacist groups.
Early Nazi Propogandists
During the 1920s the National Socialists asserted
that the German military had been victorious on the
battlefield in World War I, but that Jewish traitors
in the government had stabbed Germany in the
back, even as international Jewish financiers prepared to loot the German economy. According to
the Nazi myth, the German Volk was engaged in a
metaphysical struggle against materialist “JewCapitalists” and “Jew-Bolshevists,” both of which
533

Neo-Nazis

sought to destroy the Volkish community by fostering social inequalities and encouraging class conflict. The cosmopolitan city was characterized as a
cesspool, festering with immorality and crime,
where Jewish conspirators poisoned the hearts and
minds of the Volk. The Nazis promised to free German society from economic depression and class
conflict by establishing a racialist community under
the leadership of a divinely inspired leader. Nazi
propagandists operating in the United States
emphasized these same themes, but they met with
little success. Appeals to isolationist, anticommunist, and racist sentiment failed to bring about any
substantive alliance with U.S. antisemitic or white
supremacist organizations.
Postwar Neo-Nazis
After World War II, most U.S. racists remained
rooted in Republican and populist traditions, which
rejected socialism and dictatorship. A number of
very small Nazi groups did exist, however, with the
American Nazi Party (ANP), founded by George
Lincoln Rockwell in 1958, being the most influential. ANP conspiracy theory fused crude negrophobia with conspiratorial antisemitism: Jewish communists were believed to be spearheading the civil
rights movement in the South and enticing black
men to rape white women and riot in northern
cities. Party publications were rife with crude jokes
about African American culture and political aspirations, while providing detailed descriptions of conspiratorial machinations by Jews. Party activists
drove through the U.S. South in their Hate Bus,
and picketed screenings of Exodus and performances of The Deputy, which criticized papal policies during World War II. At antiwar rallies later in
the decade, Rockwell’s Nazis threw paint, eggs,
beer cans, and garbage at antiwar demonstrators,
provoking violent confrontations. Such theatrics
created notoriety unwarranted by any substantive
threat that the ANP posed, either to democratic
institutions or the advance of civil rights.
Rockwell’s greatest success occurred in summer
1966, when the ANP agitated against Martin Luther
King, Jr.’s housing desegregation marches in Chicago.
For twenty-two days, ANP activists inflamed race
534

relations, generating intense publicity. More than
1,000 local residents pelted civil rights marchers with
bricks and bottles, shouting “White Power!” and waving Confederate and Nazi flags (Oates, 413). Once
the protests ended and tensions subsided, however,
the Nazis lost what little support they had gained during the melee. Ignoring this fact, Rockwell shifted
gears in 1967, renaming his party the National Socialist White People’s Party (NSWPP). Attempting to
broaden the appeal to non-Aryan whites, he abandoned Nazi iconography and launched a new magazine entitled White Power! Rockwell also became
more militant, declaring that “every tendency
towards degeneracy and subversion . . . must be
weeded out and utterly destroyed” (Rockwell).
The Chicago emergence of Black Power and New
Left militancy also provided a context for Rockwell’s
increased militancy. Another reason, however, was
that Rockwell feared for his safety and was suspicious of his own followers, believing many of them
to be spies for the Anti-Defamation League (ADL)
of B’nai B’rinth. The ADL did investigate the ANP,
and two other Jewish groups had discussed Rockwell’s commission with the naval reserve in 1961,
before Rockwell was discharged. Rockwell was
made understandably paranoid, however, by a
highly effective FBI covert action program entitled
COINTELPRO-White Hate Groups. Between 1965–
1971, FBI agents cut off financial support, even as
informants sowed dissension. Federal, state, and
local authorities also created disruption: the Internal
Revenue Service conducted tax investigations, city
inspectors closed Nazi offices, and local and state
police made disorderly conduct arrests.
On 25 August 1967 a sniper assassinated George
Lincoln Rockwell. Former Stormtrooper editor
John Patler was convicted of the murder, but in the
context of an ensuing struggle for power, a number
of conspiracy theories were put forth by Rockwell’s
lieutenants. The victorious faction offered that
Patler was an ADL agent and named California
Nazi James K. Warner as his coconspirator. Warner
alleged that Matt Koehl and William Pierce had
engineered a coup to elevate Rockwell to martyrdom and seize control of the party. Accusations and
counteraccusations even led to an internecine gun-

Neo-Nazis

fight. Decrying “illegal FBI harassment,” Warner
left the NSWPP, telling Nazis loyal to him to prepare for “Armageddon, the meeting of the forces of
good and evil and the complete destruction and
death of all the mongrel hordes and their Jewish
masters” (American Nazi Party, 2).
Warner also charged that El Monte, California,
party organizer Ralph Forbes had used the NSWPP
as a recruiting ground for religious cults. Rockwell,
having met with Christian Identity minister Wesley
Swift in June 1964, had recognized the power of
theological antisemitism for recruitment purposes,
and several of his close associates, including Forbes,
later became Identity ministers. Even Warner came
to recognize Identity’s potential, and established an
Identity Church in 1975. He also organized a paramilitary group and helped former Nazi David Duke
create the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan.
Matthias Koehl took over the NSWPP and in
1967 published a more militant ten-point platform
calling for “revolution.” Quoting Adolph Hitler to
the effect that the survival of the race had become
more important than respect for law and order,
NSWPP editor William Pierce and a group of
younger Nazis launched a youth group, which
became one of the most violent neo-Nazi groups of
the early 1970s. The National Socialist Liberation
Front (NSLF) called for a “militant struggle”
against the “pigs” to “build a popular base.” The
NSLF formulated an early version of the leaderless
resistance tactics that would animate the violent
neo-Nazi cells of the early 1980s. In 1971 William
Pierce called for a revolution by “guerrilla fighters.”
He published bomb-making instructions, discussions of urban warfare techniques, and lists of targets for political assassination. Later, Pierce wrote
The Turner Diaries, an apocalyptic novel about race
war. The plot inspired a white power cell called the
Order, which committed armored car robberies and
murdered a Jewish talk show host in the early
1980s. Convicted Oklahoma City bomber Timothy
McVeigh also seems to have found the novel
provocative. Pierce’s associate, Willis Carto, became
active in the Holocaust denial movement, publishing essays that presented the Nazi genocide as a
fabrication by Communist-Zionist plotters. His

Spotlight newspaper, which dwelled on conspiratorial plots by international bankers and federal
agents, would influence the militia movement during the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Despite extensive propagandizing and publicity,
Nazis have failed to gain a substantial following in the
United States. This, combined with disruption by law
enforcement during the 1960s, encouraged some of
them to embrace terror, paramilitarism, alliances
with other racist groups, and a revolutionary agenda.
With his revolutionary call for white power, George
Lincoln Rockwell had facilitated ideological crosspollination between National Socialism, white
supremacy, and Christian Identity. Although membership in formal National Socialist groups declined
after the late 1970s, militant hybrid associations such
as the Aryan Nations, the White Aryan Resistance,
the National Alliance, and the Mountain Church
would all revere Adolph Hitler and George Lincoln
Rockwell as founders of the White Power movement.
John Drabble
See also: Antisemitism; Aryan Nations; Ku Klux
Klan; Pierce, William L.
References
American Nazi Party. 1970. “Four Ways to Protect
Your Home from Illegal FBI Intrusion.” Attack, 2
August.
Bell, Leland V. 1973. In Hitler’s Shadow: The
Anatomy of American Nazism. Port Washington,
NY: Kennikat Press.
Diamond, Sander A. The Nazi Movement in the
United States, 1924–1941. 1974. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
National Socialist Liberation Front. 1984.
Miscellaneous Ephemera 1969–1984. National
Socialist Liberation Front.
National Socialist White People’s Party. 1967. “The
Ten Points of American National Socialism” and
“New Program of the American Nazi Party.”
White Power 7 (October): 1, 2.
Oates, Stephen. 1982. Let the Trumpet Sound: The
Life of Martin Luther King, Jr. New York: New
American Library.
Ridgeway, James. 1990. Blood in the Face: The Ku
Klux Klan, Aryan Nations, Nazi Skinheads and
the Rise of a New White Culture. New York:
Thunder’s Mouth Press.
Rockwell, George Lincoln. 1967. “What We Stand
For: Goals and Objectives of the National

535

New World Order

Socialist White People’s Party.” http://ww4.
stormfront.org/posterity/ns/index.html.
Schmaltz, William H. 1999. Hate: George Lincoln
Rockwell and the American Nazi Party.
Washington, DC: Brasseys.
Websites
American Nazi Party: http://www.
americannaziparty.com.
National Socialist White Peoples’ Party: http://www.
nizkor.org/hweb/orgs/american/nationalsocialist-white-peoples-party.

New World Order
On 29 January 1991, President George Bush gave
his second State of the Union address. He spoke as
the Gulf War was under way and he was keen to promote the new era he claimed the conflict represented. Bush repeated a term he had already used in
several speeches, claiming that abroad in the world
was “a big idea, a new world order, where diverse
nations are drawn together in common cause to
achieve the universal aspirations of mankind—peace
and security, freedom, and the rule of law. Such is a
world worthy of our struggle and worthy of our children’s future.” Bush was not the first policymaker of
the 1990s to speak of a “New World Order,” but like
the others his words rested on a generally held perception that with the ending of the cold war something transformational had begun. Other visions that
saw the sunlit uplands as lying just ahead had
already been offered, most obviously two years earlier when historian Francis Fukuyama had proclaimed that “the End of History” and the arrival of
endless liberal democracy had arrived. However,
while talk of the New World Order was heard frequently in the United States for the rest of the
1990s, this was not in the affirmative sense Bush had
intended. Instead, it gained notoriety as a codephrase for the conspiracy theories of global control
that were being disseminated in print, over shortwave radio, and, most of all, the new medium of the
World Wide Web. It very soon dropped out of use
by U.S. policymakers.
For the radical Right, the mere use of the phrase
was enough, for these three words were already
familiar to groups such as the John Birch Society.
536

The preeminent right-wing conspiracy-mongers of
the 1950s and 1960s (and the focus of Richard Hofstadter’s seminal analysis of the paranoid style in
1964), the Birchers popularized its use in their literature to describe the socialistic “One Worldism” they
were convinced was being promoted by the Soviet
Union via the United Nations. The vision was of a
dedicated Communist conspiracy, working ceaselessly to overthrow U.S. liberties and incorporate the
United States into a world state and world government. Conspiracy writers (such as the author writing
under the name “Garudas”) have charted the term
“New World Order” through Henry Kissinger,
Henry Wallace, the Versailles Peace Conference,
Cecil Rhodes, and British imperialism, back to the
traditional bogeymen of many U.S. conspiracy theories—the Elders of Zion, the Freemasons, and the
Bavarian Illuminati. Genuine organizations such as
the Council on Foreign Relations, the Trilateral
Commission, the World Trade Organization, and the
Bilderberger group are said to have conspired
together to advance this goal. Needless to say, groups
like the Birchers greeted Bush’s employment of it
with the happy fear so typical of the vindicated conspiracy theorist.
However, the key users of the term in the
post–cold war 1990s were not the traditional radical
or religious Right (although figures such as Pat
Robertson did dabble), but instead were the new
grassroots militias and other self-styled “patriot”
groups that sprang up in the United States during
the decade. The New World Order (often shorthanded as “NWO”) became emblematic of their
conspiracy theories about America’s slide toward
global domination, with claims that made the
Birchers look modest in comparison. The following
is from “Operation Vampire Killer” by the “Police
Against the New World Order”:
Behind the scenes is a plan for an oligarchy of the
world’s richest families to place 1/2 the masses of the
earth in servitude under their complete control,
administered from behind the false front of the
United Nations. To facilitate management
capabilities, the plan calls for the elimination of the
other 2.5 billion people through war, disease,

New World Order

abortion, and famine by the year 2000. As we can
plainly see, their plan for population control
(reduction) is well under way. (Mulloy, 426–427)

Although the roots of this were often drawn from
religious extremism such as the Christian Identity
movement, the imagination was thoroughly post–
cold war. Treaties such as the North American Free
Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT), and various
United Nations environmental agreements were
seized upon as evidence of this super-plot. In the
patriot/militia NWO scenario one thing is made
clear: the threat was not subversion. This time the
globalist forces are here (as the preferred term
“Zionist Occupation Government,” or ZOG, made
clear), and are assisted in their plot to deprive
Americans of their collective and individual sovereignty by a traitorous federal government and its
many agencies. As a militia text asked in 1994: “Do
you know there are more than a million among us
who are trained as traitors to the American constitutional way of life [and] are slated to be our slavemasters under the New World Order?” (Mulloy,
437).
In support of all this, a profligate mishmash of
detail was put forward as “evidence.” This ranged
from the very specific—that Highway Department
notations on the back of road signs are in fact secret
codes to enable foreign troops to find their way
(with the typical excess logic of conspiracy theories,
they are written on the back because foreign troops
will prefer to drive on the wrong side of the road)—
to the sweeping, such as the claim that a government
agency such as the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), responsible for floods, hurricanes, and the like, is a cover story for the preparation of concentration camps for dissident U.S.
patriots. Among still wilder claims made are that
electronic implants can control individuals, the military can control the weather, and that hovering
above the United States is the all-seeing, allknowing black helicopter. Summing up all this, in
1994 Linda Thompson, an Indiana attorney but also
the self-styled “Adjutant General of the Unorganized Militias of America,” devised a “Re-Declara-

tion of Independence,” with this as its preamble:
“The Federal Government, at this time, is transporting large Armies of foreign mercenaries to complete the works of Death, Desolation and Tyranny,
already begun, often under the color of the law of
the United Nations, and with circumstances of Cruelty and Perfidy, scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous Ages, and totally unworthy of a civilized
Nation.” Although such views seem absurdly inconceivable (particularly for Europeans who have
learned to have little faith in the abilities of the
United Nations), such rhetoric does, of course,
sometimes connect to action. Militia opinion and
activity can easily be read as inevitably leading to the
terrible events of 19 April 1995, the bombing of the
Alfred P. Murrah Building in Oklahoma City.
However, to consider all conspiracy theories
about a New World Order as potentially terrorist or
held solely by a right-wing fringe would be a mistake. Suspicions about the order of the post–cold
war world and the United States’ role in it have
become legion and have served to mobilize public
opinion in the 1990s. Any analysis of conspiracy theories and the New World Order must recognize
that the term has had just as much employment on
the Left as the Right, and so must question its conspiratorial alignment too. For the Left, the term
came about as part of a process of counterdefinition, for instance by use of the modifier “New
World Disorder.” The name on the Left one comes
across most often is Noam Chomsky—no other
author is so associated with a coherent viewpoint on
the post–cold war order of the world and the place
of the United States within it. Chomsky offered a
succinct definition in Deterring Democracy in
1992: “The Gulf War has torn aside the veil covering the post–Cold War era. It has revealed a world
in which the United States enjoys unchallenged
military supremacy and is prepared to exploit this
advantage ruthlessly. The New World Order (in
which the New World gives the orders) has arrived”
(http:// www.znetwork.org/ chomsky/ dd/ dd.html).
Writing on this subject (with titles such as World
Orders, Old and New) and developing these ideas
has been Chomsky’s work in the last ten years and
by the end of the decade his use of the term was
537

New World Order

solidly fixed for the Left—unsurprisingly, it gained
an outing again in criticism of the War on Iraq.
Some of the debate about the New World Order has
involved cross-talk between Left and Right, leading
some to regard this as evidence of a new fusion of
political belief. However, the Kennedy and King
assassinations, Vietnam, COINTELPRO, and Watergate, Iran-Contra, and the Tuskegee syphilis study
had already offered the Left historical confirmation
for overseas military adventurism, government surveillance, corporate conspiracies, clandestine intelligence agency dirty tricks, and even Hillary Clinton’s
“vast right-wing conspiracy” against her husband. In
other words, the New World Order as the Left saw
it could not help but rest on a foundation of prior
suspicion.
Does this make the Left’s concept of the New
World Order a conspiracy theory? Not if it is taken
to mean that there is only one superpower left in
the world, and it uses its power to satisfy its own
interests. However, the larger edifice constructed
on the foundation of Left conspiracy theories does
go further. Daniel Pipes, author of Conspiracy:
How the Paranoid Style Flourishes and Where It
Comes From, claims that Chomsky is the prime
architect of a left-wing “conspiracy theory that
blames the U.S. government for virtually every ill in
the world, including environmental pollution, militarism, economic poverty, spiritual alienation, and
the drug scourge. It manipulates the mainstream
media (to divert the revolutionary potential of
workers), sponsors academic postmodernism (to
bewilder the uninitiated), and encourages professional sports (to distract attention from serious
issues)” (Pipes, 160).
Although this is a bowdlerized description of
Chomsky, it does capture the totalizing tendency
and the “can do no good” flavor of his writings. A
perception that Chomsky offers a conspiracy-tinged
analysis because he connects neglected issues
together into a narrative, which operates by what it
reveals, is suggested by his method, namely the
exhaustive plotting of a mass of detail—a skill for
which many on the Left have praised Chomsky a
great deal. Alexander Cockburn recalled “the nights
I’ve stayed at Noam and Carol Chomsky’s house in
538

Lexington and I’ve watched him at even-tide working his way through a capacious box of the day’s
intake of tripe—newspapers, weeklies, monthlies,
learned journals, flimsy mimeo-ed mailers—while
Carol Chomsky does the same thing on the other
side of the room” (Chomsky, 1992, x).
This does seem very reminiscent of the method
classically employed by conspiracy theorists on the
Right—the deep mining of the world’s detail for evidence. Chomsky might easily be defined as a guerrilla academic from MIT who mines for the “Truth.”
The embrace, not of hard-edged conspiracy theories
but of a softer conspiracy “mindedness,” bears upon
the major source for New World Order conspiracy
theories in the later 1990s, namely the antiglobalization movement. The protests in Seattle in
late November–early December of 1999 brought
together figures from Right and Left as different as
Pat Buchanan (who a month before had quit the
Republican Party, declaring himself against the New
World Order) and Situationist Anarchists intent on
trashing the home of Starbucks. Organized via the
Internet and coordinated “live” via cellphones, the
protests united for a few days over 50,000 demonstrators and led to the so-called “Battle of Seattle.”
Follow-up protests have since taken place in at other
meetings in Davos, Switzerland, Washington, D.C.,
London, and Venice. It is fair to say that these events
were bred from a conspiratorial vision of the contemporary global order. Why else did this hardly
very secretive meeting of the World Trade Organization, a bureaucratic body of 135 nations, whose
membership was publicly known, serve as a focus
for such protest? The concern came from the Left
perspective that it was responsible for large corporations being set free to ruthlessly exploit Third World
peoples and ruin the global environment, and this
proved a significant motivation for many young people. As an explicitly titled “global” organization, the
WTO therefore symbolized a great deal. The 1960s
radical Tom Hayden claimed much for the protests:
“For the first time in memory, the patriotism of the
corporate globalizers is in question, not that of their
opponents. Do the Clinton administration’s investorbased trade priorities benefit America’s interest in
high-wage jobs, environmental protection and

Newburgh Conspiracy

human rights? Are American democratic values and
middle-class interests secondary to those of transnational corporations? As a grass-roots movement
seeking the overthrow of what it sees as an oppressive system, Seattle 99 was more like the Boston Tea
Party than the days of rage we knew in the late 60s”
(http://www.portaec.net/library/mai_wto/tom_
hayden_on_the_battle_in.html).
At the heart of this seems to be less a defined
conspiracy theory than a softer, diffuse suspicion
that the post–cold war world is as not as it seems, or
as it could be, or should be, and that somebody (the
“corporate globalizers”) is responsible—a New
World misordered, perhaps?
As of 2003, the right-wing version of the New
World Order seems to be tired and declining (as are
the militias themselves), and the conspiracy theories of vitality about world order come from the
Left. Focusing on corporate globalization, their
foundation is more concerned with servicing a generalized mistrust and suspicion of the contemporary
world order than with constructing baroque conspiracy theories like those of old. Of course, such
servicing became much easier after the controversial election of the second President Bush in 2000,
the attacks of September 11, Enron and other corporate scandals, and the War on Iraq. From the evidence of sales of his book Stupid White Men,
Michael Moore’s view that corporate America stole
the election has considerable popularity. Indeed,
Vice-President Cheney has assumed for many
liberal-minded Americans a place in the Bush government every bit as conspiratorial as any Birchite
view of Charles Wilson. Conspiracy theories about
September 11 have not found the same appeal in
the United States as in Europe (notably in France),
but Gore Vidal’s contention that the attacks were
suspiciously convenient for a business-oriented
Bush administration anxious to secure oil pipelines
in Afghanistan did meet with considerable attention
after he wrote it up in a 7,000-word essay entitled,
without irony, “The Enemy Within.” The war in
Iraq and the tension between the Bush administration and the United Nations have acted largely to
confirm what many seemed to suspect already.
Alasdair Spark

See also: Bilderbergers; Council on Foreign
Relations; Illuminati; John Birch Society; Militias;
One-World Government.
References
Chomsky, Noam. 1992. Chronicles of Dissent.
Boston, MA: Common Courage Press.
———. 1992. Deterring Democracy. London:
Vintage.
———. 1994. World Orders Old and New. London:
Pluto Press.
“Gurudas.” 1996. Treason: The New World Order.
San Rafael, CA: Cassandra Press.
Howe, Linda. 1994. “Re-Declaration of
Independence.” http://10hpt.com/pub/blackcrwl/
patriot/linda-thompson-dec.txt.
Moore, Michael. 2002. Stupid White Men. New
York: Reganbooks.
Mulloy, D. J., ed. 1999. Homegrown
Revolutionaries: A Militia Reader. Norwich,
England: University of East Anglia Press.
Pipes, Daniel. 1997. Conspiracy: How the Paranoid
Style Flourishes and Where It Comes From.
Boston, MA: Free Press.
Robertson, Pat. 1991. The New World Order. Dallas,
TX: Word Books.
Vidal Gore. 2002. “The Enemy Within.” Observer,
October 27.

Newburgh Conspiracy
In March 1783 allegations erupted surrounding an
attempted coup d’état by Continental Army officers
encamped at Newburgh, New York. The relationship
between Congress and the Continental Army had
been strained throughout the Revolutionary War. As
Congress was notoriously short on cash, payments to
soldiers and officers were insufficient and erratic;
many went without remuneration for several consecutive years. Officers hoped for a recognition of their
services in the form of pensions, and Congress had in
1780 voted to award them half pay for life. However,
the impost tax of 1781, designed to finance pensions,
failed to achieve ratification by the states. Furthermore, as the financial situation of many officers worsened, they started to call for a lump sum instead of a
lifetime of small payments, a demand known as
commutation. In late 1782, the army sent a delegation under the leadership of General Alexander
McDougall to Congress in order to demand a redress
539

Newburgh Conspiracy

of their grievances. Despite the general’s vigorous
and outspoken lobbying effort, Congress voted
against commutation in January 1783. With commutation rejected, no feasible prospect of financing
pensions, and a peace treaty with Britain imminent—which meant the subsequent disbanding of
the Continental Army—discontent grew among officers who had sacrificed much for the Revolution and
now feared being left out in the cold.
A group of young officers connected to Major
General Horatio Gates, an old rival of George Washington’s, started spreading a series of anonymous
pamphlets around the Newburgh encampment in
early March 1783. These Newburgh Addresses, written by Major John Armstrong, accused Congress of
betraying the army, lambasted the ineffectiveness of
McDougall’s petition, criticized Washington for
undue moderation, and called for a meeting of officers on 11 March in order to decide on further measures. It was quite possible to see in the Newburgh
Addresses a call for rebellion against civil authority,
or even a full-scale coup d’état, but more moderate
readings were also possible. At the very least the
pamphlets proposed an ultimatum to Congress and
advocated a refusal to disband the army until their
demands were met. In any case, Washington stepped
in to defuse the situation. Forbidding the meeting on
11 March, he called for another a few days later to
discuss the results of McDougall’s petition. At this
meeting, Washington condemned the Addresses and
made an emotional appeal to remain loyal to Congress and the American Republic. Washington’s
speech won over the officers, who passed a resolution asking Congress for redress, but also affirming
their loyalty and condemning the Newburgh
Addresses.
The most controversial aspect of this crisis in military loyalty, which became known as the Newburgh
conspiracy, did not involve the officers responsible
for the Newburgh Addresses as much as a group of
nationalist politicians, especially Robert Morris, the
congressional superintendent of finance, as well as
Gouverneur Morris and Alexander Hamilton. They
hoped that lobbying efforts by the military would
induce Congress to pass a second impost law, thus
fulfilling their hope of securing the power of taxation
540

for Congress. Robert Morris had been in touch with
McDougall’s delegation and had urged the officers
to impress upon Congress in no uncertain terms the
level of discontent in the army. After Congress had
rejected commutation, McDougall wrote to Major
General Henry Knox under the pseudonym Brutus,
suggesting that the army refuse to disband until its
demands were met. Knox, however, refused to
spearhead so blatant a defiance of civil authority.
At this point, theories diverge considerably. One
interpretation holds that, spurned by Knox and thoroughly discouraged with Congress, the Morrises and
Hamilton turned to Gates and his followers to start
a coup and finally consolidate national government
in this way. Another theory argues that the nationalists did encourage Gates’s group to make their move,
but that Hamilton warned Washington of the danger
in a letter, thus making sure the coup was quelled
before it really started. Some evidence exists to support the second claim, but much remains unclear
and inconclusive. It seems doubtful that Washington
actually needed a warning from his former aide
Hamilton to be aware of trouble brewing in Newburgh, and there is some controversy over whether
Gates was actually involved. Nevertheless, the
impression of a narrowly averted rebellion shocked
Congress into voting in favor of commutation as well
as a new impost law designed to secure an independent income for Congress, endorsing central
demands of both officers and nationalists. Eventually, however, this new impost failed to achieve ratification by the states, and thus the pension question
remained unanswered. Distrust of the officer corps,
nationalist politicians, and special privilege remained contentious throughout the early Republic;
they figured prominently in the controversy surrounding the Society of the Cincinnati and the ratification of the Constitution.
Markus Hünemörder
See also: Society of the Cincinnati; Constitution,
U.S.
References
Kohn, Richard. 1970. “The Inside History of the
Newburgh Conspiracy: America and the Coup
d’Etat.” William and Mary Quarterly, 3d ser., 27:
187–220.

Nixon, Richard

Palmer, Dave. 1994. 1794: America, Its Army, and
the Birth of the Nation. Novato, CA: Presidio
Press.

Nixon, Richard
The political career of Richard Milhous Nixon
(1913–1994), thirty-seventh president of the United
States, was framed by suggestions of conspiracy,
from his rapid rise to prominence as a result of his
involvement with the Hiss case to Watergate, which
ended his career. Furthermore, the frequent diagnosis of Nixon as “paranoid” placed him as both
subject and object of numerous conspiracy theories.
Nixon’s connection to the conspiratorial even predates the Hiss case, beginning with his response to
the advertisement by the “Committee of 100” for a
candidate to oppose Congressman Jerry Voorhis.
The Committee was a group of local businessmen,
sometimes considered to have sinister motives, who
met at an elitist rural retreat, Bohemian Grove in
California, itself connected to a set of conspiracy
theories through groups such as the Bilderbergers.
Mae Brussell insists that “That ad was typical, a
covert method of pretending this was an open contest for office” (Brussell, 44). Brussell’s argument
invokes an article of faith that frequently exceeds
the “conspiracy research community”: that Nixon’s
entire career constituted a form of conspiracy.
Nixon’s early political success was largely dependent on public recognition of his preeminent position on the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC), most notably in his investigation of
espionage charges against Alger Hiss. Nixon coauthored the first piece of legislation produced by the
HUAC, the Mundt-Nixon Bill, which was anticonspiracy legislation in that it would have forced
“Communist front” organizations to reveal themselves by declaring Communist Party affiliation.
While Nixon’s ensuing prominence can only be
credited in a period in which the “international
Communist conspiracy” or “red scare” was a widespread belief, his status as perceived conspirator and
object of conspiracy exceeded the zeitgeist. Nixon
not only responded to, but also contributed to, conspiratorial beliefs, intending, for example, to investi-

gate “communistic art” in federal buildings and
insisting that filmmakers make films that warn the
American people about the dangers of communism.
Throughout his career, Nixon was linked to financial corruption and to organized crime. As the journalist Jeff Gerth argued during Nixon’s presidency,
Nixon was located at the center of a tangled web of
conspiracy: “Somewhere within the classic alliance
of money, power, and politics lies this particular
sharp-edged triangle: the Teamsters Union . . . ; the
shadowy empire of organized crime and its power;
and the political fiefdom of Richard Nixon” (Gerth,
43). This interconnection of a “shadow government”
and organized crime, termed “deep politics” by
Peter Dale Scott, is frequently aligned with Nixon in
conspiracy theories. In the document “A Skeleton
Key to the Gemstone Files,” for example, Nixon first
appears in 1956, having been “bought” by Howard
Hughes in his conspiratorial attempt to control the
U.S. electoral process. Nixon’s significant financial
dealings with Hughes inspired a number of conspiracy theories, including a purported Hughes involvement with Watergate. This contributed to a model
for the perceived power structure of the Nixon
administration, which “replaced public politics with
the politics of secrecy” (Rogin and Lottier, 19).
Watergate and Beyond
While many of Nixon’s political actions have been
considered to be conspiratorial, such as the secret
bombing of Cambodia or his obstruction of the Paris
peace talks to end the Vietnam War before the 1968
presidential election (detailed by Anthony Summers), the latter part of Nixon’s political career coincided with shifting models of power, which tended
to identify his power as overt and, therefore, largely
symbolic. Some conspiracy theories correspondingly
place Nixon as the victim of the covert “invisible
government.” Some critics have argued that Watergate was a constitutional coup d’état against Nixon;
Robert Altman’s Secret Honor (1984) presents it as
an operation designed to finally remove him from
the control of the “deep politics”—of the “Committee of 100.” But it was after the investigations into
Watergate revealed the power operations of the
Nixon administration that Nixon became linked,
541

Nuclear Freeze Movement

through conspiracy theory, to the assassination of
John F. Kennedy.
On the White House audiotape of 23 June 1972,
known as the “Smoking Gun” tape, Nixon instructs
Chief of Staff Bob Haldeman to have the CIA pressure the FBI into dropping its Watergate investigation, because it would “open up the whole Bay of
Pigs thing again.” Haldeman would later write, “It
seems that in all those references to the Bay of Pigs,
he was actually referring to the Kennedy assassination” (Haldeman, 39). Some conspiracy researchers
would specifically link the assassination to Watergate, arguing that White House burglar Frank Sturgis and fellow “Plumbers” unit member E. Howard
Hunt were the assassins, a claim investigated by the
U.S. President’s Commission on CIA Activities
within the United States, also known as the Rockefeller Commission. While there is no substantial
evidence to verify these theories, the perception of
the conspiring Nixon revealed by Watergate was
transposed onto many of his actions. For example,
Nixon, who was revealed to have been in Dallas on
the day of Kennedy’s assassination, told the Warren
Commission that he had only been in Dallas on 20
and 21 November. Nixon gave varying explanations
for this mistake, giving rise to jokes that Nixon was
the only member of his generation who did not
remember where he was when Kennedy was shot
(Vankin, 275).
Of the many reasons proffered for why Watergate occurred, one of the most enduring is that it
was an extension of Nixon’s personal paranoia. Both
opponents and some administration members
referred to this, either indirectly, by alluding to
Nixon’s “isolation” or “bunker mentality,” or
directly, by claiming he suffered from a form of persecutory paranoia. But whether or not Watergate
was initiated as an attempt to preempt Nixon’s
“enemies,” Nixon could never escape Watergate.
The verified criminality and conspiracy of Watergate would forever conjoin Nixon, the “unindicted
coconspirator” (in the legal jargon), to the realm of
conspiracy theory, with the revelation of his actions
and motivation projected onto his entire life and
career. After Watergate forced the end of his official
political career, Nixon spent the remainder of his
542

life writing books on foreign policy and attempting
to rehabilitate his public image. For many critics,
the laudatory eulogies at his funeral—Senator Bob
Dole said that the latter twentieth century would be
known as the “age of Nixon”—testified to the success of this, Nixon’s greatest conspiracy.
Karen Gai Dean
See also: Bilderbergers; Brussell, Mae; Cambodia,
Secret Bombing of; Hiss, Alger; House UnAmerican Activities Committee; Hughes, Howard;
Kennedy, John F., Assassination of; Kissinger,
Henry; Paranoia; Pentagon Papers; Red Scare;
Watergate.
References
Brussell, Mae. 1972. “How Nixon Actually Got into
Power.” The Realist, August, 43–47.
Gerth, Jeff. 1974. “Richard M. Nixon and Organized
Crime.” Penthouse, July, 43ff.
Haldeman, H. R., with Joseph DiMona. 1978. The
Ends of Power. New York: Time.
Rogin, Michael, and John Lottier. 1971. “The Inner
History of Richard Milhous Nixon.” Transaction 9
(1–2): 19–28.
Secret Honor. 1984. Prod. and dir. Robert Altman.
90 min. Sandcastle 5. Videocassette.
Summers, Anthony. 2000. The Arrogance of Power:
The Secret World of Richard Nixon. New York:
Viking.
Vankin, Jonathan. 1991. Conspiracies, Cover-ups
and Crimes: Political Manipulation and Mind
Control in America. New York: Paragon House.

Nuclear Freeze Movement
After Watergate, Vietnam, and the economic/cultural malaise of the 1970s, the election of Ronald
Reagan to the presidency appeared to offer a new
beginning for the United States. Reagan promised
to unleash U.S. business by reducing taxation and
government regulation, while simultaneously calling for major increases in defense spending so that
the United States could assume its role as the “arsenal of democracy” against the forces of aggression
in the Soviet Union. Pointing to perceived Soviet
expansionism in Afghanistan, the Middle East, the
Caribbean, and Central America, Reagan reinvigorated the cold war. However, the rhetoric and policies of the Reagan administration also reenergized

Nuclear Freeze Movement

Protesters march down a New York street to show their support of a nuclear arms freeze. (Robert Maas/Corbis)

the U.S. peace movement with the call for a freeze
on nuclear weapons by both the Soviet Union and
the United States. Many conservative supporters of
the Reagan administration reacted to the nuclear
freeze proposal by labeling the peace movement as
a conspiracy supported and financed by the Soviet
Union. In a new guise, McCarthyism had reentered
U.S. politics.
The peace movement of the 1980s had its origins
in the protest politics of the 1960s and 1970s, which
had opposed deployment of the Anti-Ballistic Missile
system and urged ratification of the Nuclear Test
Ban Treaty. This coalition of peace groups included
the American Friends Services Committee (AFSC),
Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom (WILPF), Federation of American Scientists
(FAS), Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy
(CSNP), Physicians for Social Responsibility (PSR),
Mobilization for Survival (MfS), and Clergy and
Laity Concerned (CALC). In 1979, Randall Forsberg of the MfS published Halt the Arms Race, call-

ing for a broad coalition to support a “bilateral freeze
on the production, testing, and deployment of
nuclear weapons and delivery vehicles” (Meyer, 157).
Forsberg’s appeal proved promising to many in the
peace movement, for it was intelligible to the general
public, as well as to arms control experts, and it provided a rallying point for a mass protest movement.
However, tension was manifest in the nuclear
freeze movement between those who perceived the
issue as part of a larger social movement and those
who pursued a more pragmatic political strategy. In
November 1980 the freeze campaign was given
impetus when three Massachusetts Senate districts
endorsed a nonbonding freeze resolution. This successful campaign was followed by international
protest against the deployment of cruise missiles by
the Reagan administration in Western Europe, as
well as the introduction, by Democratic Representative Jonathan Bingham of New York and Senator Ted
Kennedy of Massachusetts, of the nuclear freeze resolution into Congress.
543

Nullification

The apparent momentum of the freeze forces led
opponents of the movement to question the motives
of the peace alliance. For example, the State Department in 1981 charged that the World Peace Council
was a Soviet-front organization that funneled money
to the European peace movement, seeking to neutralize the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO). In March 1982, Secretary of State Alexander Haig called a news conference to denounce the
congressional resolution for a freeze, asserting that
the concept was bad defense, security, and arms control policy. Conservative groups and publications rallied behind the State Department and Haig. Writing
in Commentary, Vladimir Bukovsky, a Soviet dissident who had been imprisoned for his political activities, asserted that the Soviets were behind the freeze
movement, and he was shocked to observe “the ease
with which presumably mature and intelligent people had by the thousands fallen into the Soviet
booby-trap” (Bukovsky, 19). Rev. Jerry Falwell’s
Moral Majority organization issued fund-raising letters insisting that “freeze-niks” were undermining
U.S. security. In a piece for the Reader’s Digest,
Frank Chapple wrote, “Those nuclear disarmers who
cry ‘Better Red than Dead’ should examine the
record: since 1917, some 25 million people have died
under Soviet repression inside Russia and its satellites . . .” (Chapple, 70). Not to be left out of the
debate, President Reagan stated during an October
1982 press conference that nuclear freeze supporters
were being manipulated and used by forces “who
want the weakening of America” (Meyer, 215).
Proponents of the nuclear freeze invested valuable time and resources defending the movement
from the accusations of a Soviet conspiracy. Popular
opinion against the Soviet Union was further galvanized by the Soviet downing of Korean Air Lines
flight 007 in the fall of 1983. Meanwhile, the nuclear
freeze movement moved increasingly from protest
into electoral politics, only to be disappointed by the
landslide reelection of President Reagan in 1984.
Nuclear freeze proponents found it difficult to
recapture momentum after the election and became
increasingly marginalized, splintering into more narrow special-interest groups. Nevertheless, the
nuclear freeze movement may be credited with
544

placing the debate on nuclear weapons firmly within
the political mainstream, and establishing the
framework for the arms reduction talks of Reagan
and Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev in
the late 1980s.
Ron Briley
See also: Anticommunism; KAL 007; Reagan,
Ronald, Attempted Assassination of.
References
Bukovsky, Vladimir. 1982. “The Peace Movement
and the Soviet Union.” Commentary, May, 25–41.
Chapple, Frank. 1982. “Masters of Manipulation.”
Reader’s Digest, June, 68–70.
Forsberg, Randall. 1990. “A Bilateral Nuclear
Weapons Freeze.” Scientific American,
November, 52–61.
Meyer, David S. 1990. A Winter of Discontent: The
Nuclear Freeze and American Politics. New York:
Praeger.
Miller, Steven E., ed. 1984. The Nuclear Weapons
Freeze and Arms Control. Cambridge, MA:
Ballinger.

Nullification
Nullification is the assertion of power or constitutional authority by a state or subnational government
that negates or nullifies an act of the national or federal government. Because nullification inherently
involves a high level of intergovernmental conflict,
those instances where nullification becomes a dominant policy preference typically coincide with allegations of unconstitutionality and conspiratorial theories. Nullification is a concept that developed in U.S.
constitutional thought associated with federalism and
states rights. Under the compact theory, the U.S.
Constitution was created by the thirteen sovereign
states. The sovereignty of the U.S. states originated
with their each having distinct and separate creation
and governing structures as British colonies, and
that, as equal states coordinately declaring independence from Britain, each state was an equal party to
the Articles of Confederation. The original sovereignty of the states and the interpretation associated
with the establishment of the U.S. constitutional system are important foundations from which the concept of nullification developed.

Nullification

The origin of the U.S. constitutional compact
through thirteen sovereign states makes the nature
of the new union a point of historical, political, and
legal contention. As varied interpretations develop
around the nature and meaning of federalism, the
almost religious sanction attributed by the interpretive schools of thought contribute to the development of conspiratorial allegations when the federal
system reaches periods of crisis. Federalism is
defined as “a form of government in which a union
of states recognizes the sovereignty of a central
authority while retaining certain residual powers of
government” (American Heritage Dictionary,
2002). Federalism describes a system of governing
authority apportioned between central and regional
governments. This definition assumes limitations on
both national and state “spheres of authority,” and
that within these spheres they are supreme and sovereign, but that there are overlapping authorities
that they cooperate in, and within these cooperative
spheres the national government retains supremacy.
The U.S. system of federalism was described by
James Madison in The Federalist no. 39 as “neither
a national nor a federal Constitution, but a composition of both” (qtd. in Rossiter, 265). Because the
United States has a “mixed” constitution, there has
always been debate over the extent, intent, and
direction of national policy in the federal system,
and one of the principal sources of political conflict
in the United States is between state and national
governments. In almost all cases, major conflict
translates ultimately into major conspiracy theories.
As public policy conflict increased, the frequency
and severity of intergovernmental conflict increased
as well. Nullification was a concept developed by
those asserting “states rights” over national authority. Essentially, any act of the national government
that a state determined to be beyond the constitutional authority of the national government was
declared null and void. The earliest and most powerful assertions of nullification authority were written by Thomas Jefferson in the Kentucky Resolution
and James Madison in the Virginia Resolution.
The Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798 were passed
by the Federalist Congress under the support and
direction of President John Adams, who vigorously

enforced them. The national government was given
broad police powers to arrest, hold, and dispense
with foreign nationals and citizens who criticized the
U.S. government. This affront to civil liberties was
met with strong opposition, from individuals as well
as subnational governments. The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions were drafted by their respective
state legislatures in 1798 as statements of nullification
with regard to the Alien and Sedition Acts. The Kentucky Resolution, drafted by Jefferson, clearly states
the nullification view of federal law enacted unconstitutionally as “not law,” being “altogether void, and
of no force.” It further fuels the conspiratorial views
of the time by attributing as “obnoxious,” “suspicious”
and “tyrannical” the motives and designs of the president. The critics at the time saw Adams as being controlled by the British government, and alleged that
the Alien and Sedition Acts were designed to usurp
American rights to free speech as a prelude to
monarchy (Rhenquist, 48).
In 1832, President Andrew Jackson signed into
law a new tariff bill that lowered the protective tariff
that protected southern economic interests. South
Carolina responded by calling a state convention on
the matter, which resulted in its declaring the new
tariff void within the state. The work of John C. Calhoun had further developed the Jeffersonian position on constitutional authority, and the political
actions of Calhoun, then a senator from South Carolina, only further fueled the legitimacy and popular
appeal of his theory (Calhoun, xvii). The only major
point of common ground between Jacksonian
Democrats and the Whigs during the American Second Party System came in response to this nullification crisis. On this central question of states rights,
both Democrats and Whigs agreed that national
authority must prevail over the states. This unholy
alliance of bitter enemies fueled speculation that a
national conspiracy to destroy southern economic
interests was at work among the tariff opponents
because the maneuverings of Henry Clay and John
C. Calhoun had frustrated a more popularly supported effort by Van Buren to lower the tariff further, and Jackson’s defenders paradoxically included
his longtime enemies Daniel Webster, Joseph Story,
and John Quincy Adams (Schlesinger, 96).
545

Nullification

Ultimately, the American Civil War was fought in
large part to resolve the issues associated with the
underlying constitutional theory that justifies nullification, as it also justifies secession. Nullification
has been less utilized since the nineteenth century
as the Civil War resolved the question of political
authority. Ronald Reagan has been the most recent
political leader to revive the legitimacy of the states
rights position. In his 1981 inaugural address, Reagan stated that “All of us need to be reminded that
the Federal government did not create the States;
the States created the Federal government.”
Michael W. Hail
See also: Alien and Sedition Acts; Anti-Federalists;
Jefferson, Thomas.
References
American Heritage College Dictionary. 2002.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Calhoun, John C. 1953. A Disquisition on
Government. Edited by Gordon C. Post.
Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Co.

546

O’Toole, Laurence J., Jr. 2000. “Intergovernmental
Relations (IGR): The Concept of IGR as
Interdependence, Complexity, and Bargaining.”
In Public Administration: Concepts and Cases,
ed. Richard Stillman II. Boston, MA: Houghton
Mifflin Company.
Peterson, Merrill D. 1984. Thomas Jefferson:
Writings. New York: Library of America.
Reagan, Ronald. 1981. First Inaugural Address.
The Avalon Project at Yale Law School. www.
yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/presiden/inaug/
reagan1.
Rhenquist, William H. 1999. Grand Inquests. New
York: Quill.
Rossiter, Clinton, ed. 1961. Alexander Hamilton,
John Jay, and James Madison, The Federalist
Papers. New York: Penguin.
Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr. 1945. The Age of Jackson.
Boston, MA: Little, Brown, and Co.
Wills, Gary. 1999. A Necessary Evil: A History of
American Distrust of Government. New York:
Simon and Schuster.

O
October Surprise
The October Surprise conspiracy theory holds that
in October 1980, Ronald Reagan conspired with the
Islamic Republic of Iran to beat Jimmy Carter in
the U.S. presidential elections on 4 November. The
deal: in return for the Khomeini government keeping its U.S. hostages at the U.S. Embassy in Tehran
until after the election, damaging Carter’s candidacy, Reagan would reward it with armaments. The
conspiracy theory endured for over a decade, from
1980–1993, but has since disappeared.
The idea originated with Lyndon LaRouche, one
of the most prolific, original, and bizarre of U.S. conspiracy theorists. Just after the 1980 election, one
LaRouche magazine (Executive Intelligence Review,
2 December 1980) first laid out the conspiracy theory, then another one repeated it three years later
(New Solidarity, 2 September 1983). The idea
attracted minimal attention, however, until the IranContra scandal of late 1986 seemed to fulfill the
terms of the alleged deal. The former president of
Iran, Abol Hassan Bani Sadr, tentatively tried out this
theory in an article on 12 April 1987 in the Miami
Herald. When commentators in the United States
(Christopher Hitchens in particular, writing in the
Nation, 4–11 July 1987) endorsed the idea, Bani Sadr
felt emboldened to make ever-larger and more elaborate claims (the New York Times, 3 August 1987; the
Miami Herald, 9 August 1987; and an August 1987
interview [Cockburn, 192–193; 281]).
A handful of conspiracy theorists in the United
States (Barbara Honegger, Martin Kilian, David

Marks, Robert Parry, Jurgen Roth, and Craig Unger)
began researching Bani Sadr’s allegations and stumbled upon an array of self-promoters, con men, and
criminals from several countries. The cast included
Israelis (Ari Ben-Menashe, Ahran Moshell, and Will
Northrop), Frenchmen (Robert Benes and Nicholas
Ignatiew), Iranians (Jamshid Hashemi, Ahmed Heidari, Houshang Lavi, and Hamid Naqashan), Americans (Richard Babayan, Richard Brenneke, William
Herrmann, Oswald LeWinter, Heinrich Rupp, and
Gunther Russbacher), and even a South African
(Dirk Stoffberg). Not only did they confirm the story
and add their own elaborations, but the researchers
carelessly contaminated their sources by informing
them of others’ statements, further stimulating them
to grandiose claims.
After a year, Bani Sadr returned to the topic and
found his conspiracy outline fully fleshed out; he was
especially impressed by Brenneke’s allegations at a
1988 trial in Denver, which in his eyes offered official documentation of the plot. Encouraged by this
new information, the former Iranian president now
hypothesized a much larger and longer-lasting conspiracy between Reagan and Khomeini (Playboy,
September 1988; and the interviews he granted to
Jean-Charles Deniau in September and October
1988, forming the basis of their joint book [Deniau
and Sadr, 48; 57]).
Although the October Surprise theory had now
ripened, it remained the guilty pleasure of die-hard
conspiracy theorists. Only when the New York Times
on 15 April 1991 devoted an exceptional two-thirds of
547

October Surprise

Editorial cartoon showing President Reagan on his knees
behind an empty television, presumably announcing the
release of hostages in the Middle East, at the same time
that he hands Ayatollah Khomeini, who stands to the right
of the television, an “arms payoff for hostage release.”
(Library of Congress)

its opinion page to this thesis did it become a public
issue. The author of this article, Gary Sick, brought to
the issue an establishment pedigree (navy captain,
Columbia University Ph.D., Ford Foundation program officer, Human Rights Watch board member)
as well as the credibility of having served as principal
White House aide for Iran during the Iranian Revolution and the hostage crisis. Sick alleged that “individuals associated with the Reagan-Bush campaign of
1980 met secretly with Iranian officials to delay the
release of the U.S. hostages until after the U.S. election. For this favor, Iran was rewarded with a substantial supply of arms from Israel.” Sick also raised
548

the possibility that George Bush was one of those
Americans, thereby impugning the legitimacy of at
least one subsequent Republican president.
The October Surprise instantly vaulted to national
importance. Leading television shows devoted hours
to the subject, weeklies made it the subject of cover
stories, and Jimmy Carter called for an investigation.
A January 1992 poll showed 55 percent of Americans
believing these allegations to be true and just 34 percent finding them false (Goertzel, 733). As part of his
preparations to run for the presidency, H. Ross Perot
sent his associates to talk with Gunther Russbacher
in his Missouri jail cell. In February 1992, the House
of Representatives voted in favor of an investigation
of the charges and the Senate followed suit soon
after.
Sick himself expanded his op-ed into a 278-page
book, October Surprise: America’s Hostages in Iran
and the Election of Ronald Reagan. Here, Sick
characterized the 1980 election as a “covert political
coup.” To give his story the feel of authenticity so
important to a conspiracy theory, he chronicled in
loving detail events that (it turned out) never took
place. Thus, discussing a phantom meeting in
Madrid on 27 July 1980, for example, he provided
this little touch: “The conversation was interrupted
twice, when hotel waiters arrived to serve coffee”
(Sick, 83).
So much attention to the October Surprise theory
meant it had to be checked in sober and exhaustive
detail, and under such scrutiny it promptly collapsed.
Several journalistic investigations started the process,
especially Frank Snepp, “Brenneke Exposed,” Village Voice, 10 September 1991; John Barry, “Making
of a Myth,” Newsweek, 11 November 1991; Steve
Emerson and Jesse Furman, “The Conspiracy That
Wasn’t,” New Republic, 18 November 1991; and
Frank Snepp, “October Surmise,” Village Voice, 25
February 1992.
Two congressional inquiries then confirmed these
conclusions. The Senate stated that “by any standard, the credible evidence now known falls far
short of supporting the allegation of an agreement
between the Reagan campaign and Iran to delay the
release of the hostages” (Committee on Foreign
Relations 1992, 115). The House report went fur-

October Surprise

ther, declaring that “There was no October Surprise
agreement ever reached.” It found “wholly insufficient credible evidence” that communication took
place between the Reagan campaign and the Iranian
government and “no credible evidence” of an
attempt by the campaign to delay the hostages’
release. The report also expressed concern that “certain witnesses may have committed perjury during
sworn testimony” (Committee of the Whole House
on the State of the Union 53; 7–8; 239).
Surprisingly, given that once started, conspiracy
theories tend to live on indefinitely, this one did not.
For once, research successfully discredited a conspiracy theory. Symbolic of this was that Oliver
Stone decided not to make a movie on this topic.
But a devout conspiracy theorist sticks to his guns
and Sick continued to forward the October Surprise
thesis, writing (New York Times, 24 January 1993)
that the House report “does not lay . . . to rest” his
claims of campaign contacts with Iranians; and that
it “leaves open the possibility” of Republican interference with the Carter administration’s foreign
policy negotiations.
The October Surprise episode holds much interest as a conspiracy theory case study. In particular,
two features stand out: Gary Sick’s having singlehandedly transformed it from a story only taken seriously on the left-wing fringe into a credible mainstream claim; and the clarity with which it
confirmed the conspiracy theorists’ tendency to
accuse others of what they themselves are doing. On
this latter point: again and again, one finds that
whereas the conspiracy theorists’ accusations of collusion and illegal behavior were unsubstantiated,
they themselves engaged in precisely such behavior.
Examples include:
• They claimed Casey and Bush pretended to
be in the United States when they were in
Paris and Madrid. Richard Brenneke, perhaps
the single most important informant for the
October Surprise thesis, claimed to be in
Paris and Madrid when credit card receipts
proved he was in Portland, Oregon.
• They accused Reagan campaign officials of
plotting to save their necks, when this is what

the conspiracy theorists were doing; at least
seven of them (Robert Benes, Richard Brenneke, Ahmed Heidari, Nicholas Ignatiew,
Oswald LeWinter, Hamid Naqashan, and Will
Northrop) were implicated in a 1986 sting
operation and the October Surprise offered a
way to rehabilitate their reputations.
• Sick, a former Carter administration official,
accused the Reagan campaign of secretly
working out an arms deal with the Iranians.
In fact, as Sick himself already disclosed in
1985, Jimmy Carter initiated such a deal.
• Sick accused others of withholding information, yet this is precisely what he did, keeping
quiet about the hundreds of thousands of dollars he received from Oliver Stone for the
movie rights to the October Surprise story.
• Sick accused U.S. government officials of
lying, yet he was less than honest himself. He
wrote in his New York Times article that he
had heard rumors of a Reagan-Khomeini deal
during the 1988 election campaign but he
“refused to believe them.” Not so: on 30
October, 1988, at the very peak of the 1988
election campaign, he told the Rocky Mountain News, “At first I dismissed this, but not
any more. I’m convinced on the basis of what
I heard that there were some meetings in
Paris.”
Daniel Pipes
References
Cockburn, Leslie. 1987. Out of Control. New York:
The Atlantic Monthly Press.
Deniau, Jean-Charles, and Bani Sadr. 1987. Le
Complot des ayatollahs. Paris: Editions la
Découverte.
Goertzel, Ted. 1994. “Belief in Conspiracy
Theories.” Political Psychology 15.
Sick, Gary. 1991. October Surprise: America’s
Hostages in Iran and the Election of Ronald
Reagan. New York: Times Books.
U.S. House. 1993. Committee of the Whole House
on the State of the Union. Joint Report of the
Task Force to Investigate Certain Allegations
Concerning the Holding of American Hostages by
Iran in 1980. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.

549

Octopus

U.S. Sentate. 1992. Committee on Foreign
Relations. The “October Surprise” Allegations and
the Circumstances Surrounding the Release of the
American Hostages Held in Iran. Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Octopus
“The Octopus” was researcher Danny Casolaro’s
term for the vast series of interlocking conspiracies
he believed he had uncovered when investigating the
Inslaw case before his death. The suspicious circumstances of his death (he was found with his wrists
slashed in a hotel room on 10 August 1991) and the
fact that some of his research notes seemed to be
missing just as he had apparently been on the verge
of a major breakthrough have led many in the conspiracy research community to believe that Casolaro
had indeed uncovered something big.
Casolaro had been investigating the alleged theft
by the Justice Department of a software program
called PROMIS developed by the Inslaw company. A
database software program, PROMIS was originally
designed as a tool to aid prosecutors in tracking criminals in the justice system. According to Casolaro,
however, the program had been stolen by members
of the Octopus, who first engineered a secret, digital
“back door” capacity allowing them undetected access, before selling it to other intelligence agencies in
the United States and around the world. The illegal
acquisition and subsequent sale was allegedly masterminded by President Reagan’s attorney general,
Edward Meese, and his coconspirator, Earl Brian, as
part of the reward to the Ayatolloah Khomeini for the
“October Surprise,” the much-rumored but probably
untrue story of a plan to delay the release of the U.S.
hostages held by Iran in order to aid Reagan’s campaign for the presidency. The charge of theft was
rejected by a federal court, although the revelations
in the Iran-Contra hearings seemed to bear out some
of Casolaro’s ideas—at the very least, many of the
same names and associations came up.
As Casolaro began to investigate further, he saw
signs of the Octopus in Hughes Aircraft, in the Wackenhut corporation, which for a time supplied security
for Area 51, the secret military base in the Nevada
550

desert, and in a series of murders in the Cabazon
tribe of Native Americans in California, which had
supposedly been engaged in a joint venture with the
Wackenhut corporation. Many of Casolaro’s leads,
however, were supplied by Michael Riconosciuto,
who was at the time serving a prison sentence for
fraud, but who claimed he had inside knowledge of
the PROMIS case.
As with the investigation into the Kennedy assassination, Casolaro believed he had uncovered a pattern
of suspicious deaths of anyone who became involved
in the story, a factor that led later researchers to consider Casolaro’s own suicide as suspicious. These later
researchers have continued from where Casolaro’s
fragmentary notes left off, with claims that the complicated and often contradictory tentacles of the
Octopus conspiracy have been connected with the
death of Vince Foster (one theory is that banks had
got hold of the PROMIS software and had thrown light
on secret accounts), the death of Princess Diana
(Dodi Fayed’s uncle, an arms dealer, appears in Casolaro’s notes), and September 11 (it is rumored that
Osama bin Laden purchased an enhanced version of
PROMIS from the Russians that enabled him to evade
capture).
Peter Knight
See also: Area 51; Hughes, Howard; October
Surprise.
References
Fenster, Mark. 1999. Conspiracy Theories: Secrecy
and Power in American Culture. Minneapolis,
MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Thomas, Kenn, and Jim Keith. 1996. The Octopus:
Secret Government and the Death of Danny
Casolaro. Portland, OR: Feral House.

Oil Industry
Oil is an essential economic and strategic commodity. Oil power enabled the internal combustion
engine to revolutionize industry, society, and the
conduct of warfare in the twentieth century. Necessarily, the oil industry is one of the world’s largest
industries, and plays a major political and economic
role in many nations. Conspiracy theories, however,
hold that the oil industry secretly controls U.S. pol-

Oil Industry

itics and foreign policy from behind the scenes.
These theories reject conventional explanations for
wars, terrorist attacks, and assassinations, and assert
instead that these events were “really about oil.”
Actual Conspiracies
The oil industry has often behaved in a conspiratorial fashion. In the early 1870s, John D. Rockefeller
resolved to monopolize the oil industry, and his Standard Oil Company soon controlled 90–95 percent of
U.S. production and refining. Standard derived considerable advantage from large size and superior
organization, but also ruthlessly used espionage,
price-cutting, intimidation, and bribery to destroy or
absorb rivals. Standard negotiated secret agreements
with the railroads to charge Standard lower transportation rates than rival companies, and to pay
Standard a percentage of every dollar the railroads
charged Standard’s rivals. Antitrust legislation, and
the emergence of new sources of supply, ultimately
prevented Standard from eliminating all competitors. However, the Rockefeller family amassed a vast
fortune and political influence that persists even
today.
In 1928, British, Dutch, and U.S. oil companies
divided the Middle Eastern market and agreed to
prevent overproduction, allocate quotas, fix prices,
and deal jointly with outside producers. After World
War II, the United States abrogated these agreements and secured an increased presence for U.S.
companies in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and Iran. The
U.S. Congress, Justice Department, and Federal
Trade Commission investigated these agreements.
Consequently, in 1952 the Justice Department convened a grand jury to pursue civil and criminal
antitrust charges against the oil companies. Ironically, even as the antitrust case progressed, the State
Department was negotiating with Britain to create
the cartel that controlled Iranian production and
refining. President Eisenhower wanted to use the oil
industry to exclude Soviet influence from Iran, and
this national security consideration trumped
antitrust concerns. At length, the antitrust case
petered out without significant result.
The Enron case is a recent example of a criminal
conspiracy in the oil industry. After Enron went

bankrupt in 2001, company officials were indicted on
charges of fraud and money laundering. Other allegations included improper accounting, falsification
of financial statements, and conspiracy to manipulate
energy prices in California. The full extent of Enron’s
political influence remains unknown, although several senior Bush administration officials have Enron
connections.
Oil and U.S. Foreign Policy
Most historians agree that the U.S. government uses
the oil companies as instruments of foreign policy.
Conspiracy theorists, however, cite the above examples from the sordid history of the oil industry to
support the argument that the U.S. government is
an instrument of the oil companies. Such theorists
insist that government policy (especially foreign policy) usually benefits the oil industry.
The theory that the oil industry exerts undue
influence on U.S. politics and foreign policy emerges
partly from the large number of government officials
drawn from the so-called Eastern Establishment.
The Eastern Establishment includes northeastern
(especially New York) law firms, financial institutions, foundations, media corporations, Ivy League
schools, and think tanks such as the Trilateral Commission and Council on Foreign Relations. Conspiracy theorists contend that “the Rockefellers” (a term
synonymous with the oil industry) control the Eastern Establishment, and thereby control the government. The secretary of state, in particular, has always
been a member of the Rockefeller faction since
World War II, as have many CIA directors.
Conspiracy theories maintain that Middle Eastern
coups and wars are manufactured in Washington to
increase U.S. hegemony over the region’s oil. Daniel
Pipes shows that such theories are strongly held in
Middle Eastern countries themselves. Even responsible national leaders fear that the CIA will overthrow them at the behest of the oil industry, or that
Israel and western countries will conspire to attack
them for reasons related to oil. (Of course, such a
coup actually occurred in Iran in 1953, and Britain,
France, and Israel indeed conspired to attack Egypt
in 1956.) Conspiracy theorists contend that the Yom
Kippur War, the Iran-Iraq War, the Gulf War, and
551

Oil Industry

the current “War on Terrorism” all resulted from
U.S. manipulation and were intended to benefit the
U.S. oil industry.
In 1967, Israel inflicted a crushing defeat on
Egypt, Jordan, and Syria. The Arabs rearmed, and
attempted to recapture their lost territories on Yom
Kippur in 1973. Arab armies made initial progress
until Israel counterattacked. OPEC oil producers
embargoed the United States, Portugal, the Netherlands, and South Africa for their support of Israel,
and oil prices skyrocketed. Conspiracy theorists
argue that then-Secretary of State Henry Kissinger
(the Rockefellers’ principal pawn) engineered this
war in order to raise oil prices as part of his strategy
of détente. The price increase rewarded the Soviet
Union (an oil producer) and punished America’s
principal economic competitors (Europe and
Japan), who were more dependent on Middle Eastern oil than the United States. Supposedly, Kissinger
told the Arabs that the United States could not
induce Israel to begin the “peace process” until the
Arabs scored a victory on the battlefield. Moreover,
Kissinger restrained Israel from launching a preemptive strike before the Arabs attacked.
In 1979, growing unrest in Iran led to the overthrow of the shah and the rise of an Islamic fundamentalist regime, which seized the U.S. embassy in
Tehran. The humiliating hostage crisis, and the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, triggered a spike in oil
prices, and contributed to Ronald Reagan’s electoral
victory in 1980. Just before the election, Saddam
Hussein’s Iraq tried to seize Iran’s oilfields, leading to
eight years of bloody, indecisive warfare. These
events provoked many conspiracy theories. The shah
himself believed that foreign conspirators overthrew
him, at times naming the oil companies as his nemesis. Many Iranians still believe the CIA ousted the
shah. Some contend that the Reagan campaign conspired with Khomeini to ensure that the embassy
hostages were not released before the 1980 election
(known as “the October Surprise”).
Other theories insist that Washington wanted high
oil prices in 1979 in order to slow European and
Japanese economic growth vis-à-vis the United
States. Part of this reprise of the 1973 strategy was
President Carter’s “green light” for Saddam to attack
552

Iran. Carter and the oil industry hoped that Saddam’s attack would bring Iranian oil under the control of a de facto ally, and would force Iran to cooperate with Washington, since the Iranian military
depended on U.S. equipment. Carter also hoped
this pressure would lead to the overthrow of Khomeini and the release of U.S. hostages before the 1980
elections. Proponents of this alternative “October
Surprise” theory observe that the United States
“tilted” toward Iraq from early 1980 until early 1990.
Some authors argue that Washington manipulated
oil prices downward in the 1980s in order to bankrupt the Soviet Union. To reward cooperative Soviet
policies after 1989, however, Washington decided to
use Iraq to raise the price of oil. In July 1990, the
U.S. ambassador to Iraq told Saddam Hussein that
the United States had “no opinion” on Iraq’s border
dispute with Kuwait. Conspiracy theorists consider
this a U.S. “green light” for Saddam’s invasion of
Kuwait in August 1990. The “green light” was a
deliberate trap—the U.S. never intended to permit
Saddam to keep Kuwait. Instead, the U.S. intended
to use the resulting crisis and war to increase the
price of oil and to introduce major military forces
into Saudi Arabia and neighboring oil-rich states,
where they remain to this day. The oil industry further profited from the rebuilding of Kuwait after the
war.
Conspiracy theorists cite the connections between
President Bush, administration officials such as thenDefense Secretary Cheney, and the oil industry to
support the claim that the 1991 Gulf War was “really”
about oil. Such theorists again cite the connections
between President George W. Bush, Vice-President
Cheney, other administration officials, and the oil
industry to support their views of the September 11
terrorist attacks and their aftermath.
The conspiracy view of September 11 is that the
Bush administration knew the attacks were coming,
but deliberately let them happen to provide a pretext for military aggression. The “War on Terrorism”
is thus a fig leaf to cover the “real” U.S. agenda—to
control Central Asian oil resources and the potential
pipeline routes through Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Allegedly, the United States initially backed the
vicious Taliban regime in Afghanistan because the

Oklahoma City Bombing

Taliban were receptive to pipeline construction.
However, pipeline negotiations failed in 1998, and
the United States then began to subvert the Taliban.
After September 11, the United States simply executed a long-prepared plan for an invasion of
Afghanistan. The increased U.S. military presence
in Central Asia and the Saudi peninsula allowed the
U.S. to tighten its grip on the region’s oil, and to prepare for an invasion of Iraq. Conspiracy theorists
believed that if the U.S. invaded Iraq, the “real”
objective would have been to allow U.S. oil companies to exploit idle Iraqi oilfields.
James D. Perry
See also: Bush, George; Council on Foreign
Relations; Kissinger, Henry; October Surprise;
Rockefeller Family; Trilateral Commission; Trusts.
References
Blair, John M. 1976. The Control of Oil. New York:
Pantheon.
Martin, Patrick. 2002. “Oil and Conspiracy
Theories.” http://www.wsws.org. 20–21
September.
Pipes, Daniel. 1996. The Hidden Hand: Middle East
Fears of Conspiracy. New York: St. Martin’s
Press.
Salinger, Pierre. 1991. Secret Dossier: The Hidden
Agenda behind the Gulf War. New York: Penguin.
Shaffer, Ed. 1983. The United States and the
Control of World Oil. New York: St. Martin’s
Press.
Thornton, Richard C. 1989. The Nixon-Kissinger
Years. New York: Paragon House.
———. 1991. The Carter Years. New York: Paragon
House.
Yergin, Daniel. 1991. The Prize. New York: Simon
and Schuster.

Oklahoma City Bombing
The bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal
Building in Oklahoma City took place on 19 April
1995 and Timothy McVeigh was later convicted for
the act. Conspiracy theories played a role in both the
cause and the interpretation of the bombing. On the
one hand, McVeigh had been active on the fringes of
the militia movement and held conspiratorial views
about the role of the government. On the other, a

range of conspiracy theories have emerged, from the
suggestion that the bombing was the work of the
government seeking to justify a crackdown on militias and citizens’ rights in the guise of antiterrorism
legislation, to the possibility that McVeigh was part
of a larger conspiracy.
The blast killed 168 people, including 19 children,
and over 500 were injured. On 10 August 1995, a federal grand jury indicted Timothy James McVeigh and
Terry Lynn Nichols on several counts relating to the
bombing, including conspiracy to use a “weapon of
mass destruction, namely an explosive bomb placed
in a truck . . . to kill and injure innocent people and
to damage property of the United States” (Keith,
220). On 2 June 1997 McVeigh was found guilty of all
the charges against him by a federal court jury in
Denver and on 13 June he was sentenced to death.
On 23 December 1997 Terry Nichols was convicted
in his trial of one count of conspiracy in the bombing
and eight counts of involuntary manslaughter. He was
not convicted of any of the murder charges against
him, or of using a weapon of mass destruction.
Nichols was sentenced to life imprisonment without
parole. A third person, Michael Fortier, a former colleague of McVeigh’s from the U.S. Army, admitted to
having had advanced warning about the bombing and
to having helped McVeigh and Nichols traffic in
stolen firearms. He was given a reduced twelve-year
sentence by agreeing to testify against both McVeigh
and Nichols.
This is what might be called the “official version”
of the Oklahoma City bombing. It takes the position—one challenged by numerous conspiracy theories—that although McVeigh had assistance from
both Nichols and Fortier, it was McVeigh who was
principally responsible for the bombing of the Murrah Building; that essentially McVeigh carried out
the bombing alone. This is the same version of events
McVeigh described to his biographers, Dan Herbeck
and Lou Michael, in their book American Terrorist:
Timothy McVeigh and the Oklahoma City Bombing.
According to McVeigh, it was he alone who drove a
rented Ryder truck containing almost 7,000 pounds
of explosive material to Oklahoma City from Kansas,
he alone who parked the truck bomb in front of the
Murrah Building just before 9:00 A.M. on 19 April,
553

Oklahoma City Bombing

and he alone who lit the fuses to detonate the explosives. There was, say both McVeigh himself and the
U.S. government, no wider conspiracy beyond
McVeigh and Nichols (as many others have suggested). For this reason, the “official” version of the
Oklahoma City bombing is also referred to as the
“lone bomber theory.”
McVeigh’s motivation for the bombing, according
to this explanation, was his belief that the federal
government was increasingly becoming a threat to
the rights and liberties of U.S. citizens, especially
with regard to their Second Amendment “right to
keep and bear arms.” McVeigh was particularly concerned by the events at Waco, Texas, in 1993. He
was convinced that the FBI had deliberately set fire
to the Branch Davidian’s complex and then tried to
cover it up. By bombing the Murrah Federal Building, McVeigh hoped to prevent any more Wacos in
the future. (The bombing took place on the second
anniversary of the ending of the Waco “siege” on 19
April 1993.) McVeigh was also heavily influenced by
The Turner Diaries, a racist novel written by
William Pierce—under the pseudonym Andrew
Macdonald—a former officer in the American Nazi
Party and leader of the extreme right National
Alliance. The novel tells the story of Earl Turner’s
part in a violent struggle against the Jewish rulers of
the United States, and contains a detailed account
of the explosion of a truck bomb placed outside the
headquarters of the FBI in Washington, D.C.
Despite the successful convictions of McVeigh
and Nichols, and McVeigh’s own endorsement of
the official “lone wolf” theory of the bombing,
numerous conspiracy theories have developed
around it. Many contend that the U.S. government
itself was involved in the bombing of the Murrah
Building. This idea is one that has been particularly
pronounced within the far right of U.S. politics,
especially within the Patriot and militia movements.
A Government Plot?
One of the most widespread of these conspiracy
theories is that the bombing was planned and carried out by the government in order to secure the
passage of counterterrorism legislation that would
allow it to crack down on far-right activists. Refer554

ring to the burning of the German Parliament in
1933, which was used as a justification by the new
Nazi government to move against its opponents,
advocates of this theory commonly refer to the
bombing as America’s own “Reichstag Fire.” Counterterrorism legislation first proposed in the immediate aftermath of the bombing was eventually
signed into law by President Clinton as the Terrorism Prevention and Effective Death Penalty Act in
April 1996.
At the time of the bombing many Patriots also
expressed fears that it might have been carried out by
the government as part of a plan to impose a “oneworld government” on the United States under the
control of the United Nations. Others took the view
that the bombing was a deliberately manufactured
crisis that might be used to inflict martial law upon
the United States, thereby allowing the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to take
over the running of the country. For the antigovernment activist Eustace Mullins, the bombing was “a
deliberate conspiracy by corrupt and treasonous elements in the federal agencies in Washington as part
of a plan to provoke martial law, confiscate legal guns
from American citizens, and to wipe out the citizens
militia of the several states” (Stern, 206). Waco also
features prominently in these conspiracy theories,
with some in the Patriot and militia movements suggesting that the bombing was intended to destroy
evidence of the government’s wrongdoing at Waco,
which was being stored inside the Murrah Building.
Another, often related, conspiracy theory in this
regard is the “Manchurian Candidate” theory.
Named for the 1959 novel by Richard Condon
(filmed in 1962 by John Frankenheimer) about the
assassination of a presidential candidate by a brainwashed U.S. Army officer, this theory suggests that
Timothy McVeigh was “programmed” by the government to do the bombing. “Evidence” to support this
theory appeared to come from McVeigh’s claims that
a computer chip had been implanted in his buttocks
during his time in the army. Yet according to his biographers this was just a “tall tale” McVeigh liked to
tell, rather than something he actually believed (Herbek and Michel, 133). However, if he wasn’t a “preprogrammed” government agent, other conspiracists

Oklahoma City Bombing

nonetheless still see McVeigh as a “useful idiot” or a
Lee Harvey Oswald–like “patsy” acting on the government’s behalf.
Conspiracy theories concerning the Oklahoma
City bombing also posit the possibility that more than
one bomb was detonated on 19 April. Militia groups
such as the Militia of Montana, for example, have circulated seismographic evidence showing two “blips”
on a seismographic chart in the belief that this provides evidence that two bombs exploded on that day
(a copy of the chart can be found in Keith, 141). The
Oklahoma Geological Survey which recorded these
“blips” refuted this suggestion, however, explaining
that the second “blip” was caused by the Murrah
Building falling down rather than by another bomb.
J. Orlin Grabbe, though, has claimed that a secret
Pentagon report describes how explosives were in
fact placed on five columns inside the Murrah Building, and that it was these that caused the building to
fall rather than the truck bomb placed outside. In
contrast, the far-right publication the Spotlight suggested that it was a secret and sophisticated “Aneutronic” bomb that was used—a device too sophisticated and technically demanding for either
McVeigh or Nichols to have created themselves.
There is also the “government sting gone wrong”
version of events. According to this theory, agents
from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms
(BATF) had advanced warning about the bombing,
but failed to act upon it because they wanted to
arrest the perpetrators in front of the Murrah
Building itself, in order to generate “massive publicity” following the public relations problems the
agency had suffered as a result of its handling of the
confrontations at Ruby Ridge in Idaho in 1992 and
Waco in 1993. Unfortunately, however, the agents
tracking the truck lost it when a double agent the
BATF had been working with “turned off the concealed beeper on the truck” (Skolnick). Advocates
of this theory point to the absence of BATF agents
from their offices inside the Murrah Building at the
time the bomb went off to support their claims. Trying to reconcile this theory with the secret Pentagon
report of the five demolition charges being placed
inside the Murrah Building, J. Orlin Grabbe considers the possibility that someone was “using their

knowledge” of the sting operation as “a cover for
the actual bombing.” “Either way,” Grabbe concludes, “it suggests an inside job.”
All of these charges and claims have been
strongly refuted by the BATF and others, and there
is no convincing evidence to support any of the conspiracy theories that the U.S. government was
involved in the Oklahoma City bombing.
John Doe No. 2 and “Others Unknown”
Members of the far right in the United States are
not the only people to have suggested that more
people than Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols
might have been involved in the Oklahoma City
bombing. Relatives of those who died in the explosion, journalists, academics, politicians, and lawyers
have all raised doubts about the official “lone
bomber” theory. One of the reasons for this is that
on the day after the bombing, 20 April 1995, the
FBI issued composite sketches of two unidentified
suspects, known as “John Doe No. 1” and “John Doe
No. 2,” whom several witnesses had connected with
the rented Ryder truck containing the bomb. John
Doe No. 1 was quickly identified as McVeigh, but
the identity and even the existence of John Doe No.
2 has remained a matter of great controversy. The
original grand jury indictment against McVeigh and
Nichols also encouraged speculation about a wider
conspiracy because of its reference to McVeigh and
Nichols having planned to carry out the bombing
with “others unknown” (Keith, 220).
Glenn and Cathy Wilburn, who lost two grandsons in the bombing, were the most prominent relatives of those who died in Oklahoma City to call for
an investigation into the possibility of a wider conspiracy. Drawing on the work of an Oklahoma journalist, J. D. Cash, they persuaded Republican state
representative Charles Key to campaign for a grand
jury to investigate not only the existence of other
perpetrators behind the bombing, but also allegations that the government had had prior knowledge
of the attack. One of Cash’s claims, for instance, was
that he had evidence linking John Doe No. 2 to
some of the inhabitants of Elohim City, a Christian
Identity community in eastern Oklahoma. This theory was picked up by Stephen Jones, McVeigh’s
555

Oklahoma City Bombing

chief defense counsel during his trial, and Cash’s
work also appeared in an Internet newsletter, The
John Doe Times, created by the First Alabama Cavalry Regiment (Constitutional Militia) in Birmingham in 1996, which was widely circulated by both
Patriot and mainstream media sources.
Stephen Jones simply didn’t believe that McVeigh
could have acted largely alone, as the government
maintained. Following Cash, he was particularly
concerned that the government hadn’t properly
investigated possible links between the Oklahoma
City bombing and Elohim City, especially those
involving Andeas Strassmeir—known as “Andy the
German”—who was Elohim City’s chief of security
and weapons training, and Dennis Mahon, a former
grand dragon of the Ku Klux Klan and leader of the
White Aryan Resistance. Jones, for example, had
uncovered reports from a BATF informant called
Carol Howe from 1994 in which she claimed that
Mahon and Strassmeir were planning a terrorist
campaign that would include the blowing up of a
federal building and that “the Oklahoma City Federal Building” was one of the possible targets (Jones
and Israel, 187). Further, Jones also arranged for
McVeigh to undertake a polygraph test. The results
of this revealed that McVeigh was being truthful
when he described his own part in the bombing, but
that he was being evasive when asked whether others, besides those already charged, had been
involved. McVeigh provided an explanation for this
discrepancy by explaining to his biographers that the
polygraph “was thrown off by his anxieties over
being asked the same questions again and again,” as
well as by his concern that the federal authorities
might be trying to implicate his sister Jennifer in the
bombing (Herbeck and Michel, 296).
McVeigh consistently denied that anyone else
other than Nichols and Fortier had any involvement
in the Oklahoma City bombing. He claimed that he
had met Strassmeir once, at a gun show in Tulsa,
and said that he had never met Mahon. In a letter
to the Houston Chronicle on 2 May 2001, he argued
that Jones’s claims concerning a wider conspiracy—
which the trial judge Richard G. Matsch had ruled
to be inadmissible, and which, in addition to a link
with the residents of Elohim City, had also raised
556

the possibility of overseas involvement in the bombing by Islamic extremists such as Osama bin Laden,
Iraq, and the Irish Republican Army—had been
“thoroughly discredited.” “Does anyone honestly
believe,” McVeigh asked, “that if there was a John
Doe No. 2 (there is not), that Stephen Jones would
still be alive? Think about it.” (Cobb).
On 29 January 1997, the Justice Department announced that those witnesses who had claimed to
have seen John Doe No. 2 had been mistaken. No
John Doe No. 2 existed. On 31 December 1998 the
Oklahoma grand jury petitioned for by Glenn and
Cathy Wilburn, among others, also concluded that
there was no John Doe No. 2. There were no additional perpetrators of the Oklahoma City bombing,
it said, no evidence of any connection to Elohim
City, and no evidence that the government had
received any advanced warning of the bombing.
Despite this, the belief that there was a wideranging conspiracy behind the Oklahoma City
bombing refuses to disappear. It was given renewed
emphasis as a result of the publication of Mark S.
Hamm’s book In Bad Company: America’s Terrorist
Underground in 2002.
“Multiple John Doe No. 2s” and
Some Continuing Questions
Also building on the investigations of J. D. Cash,
Hamm contends that there was a wider conspiracy
behind the Oklahoma City bombing, and that this
conspiracy was the work of a neo-Nazi influenced
antigovernment paramilitary gang known as the
Aryan Republican Army (ARA). According to
Hamm’s “multiple John Doe 2 theory,” four cells of
the ARA were involved in the bombing. The first cell
contained “the bomb builders,” Steven Colbern,
Dennis Malzac, and a third unidentified man whom
Hamm refers to as the “phantom bomb builder.” The
second cell was made up of McVeigh, Nichols, and
Fortier, and according to Hamm their role was “to
plan and develop a strategy for the bombing.” A third
cell was to deal with “information, training, weapons,
and logistical support,” and this, Hamm says, was led
by Andreas Strassmier. It also included Denis Mahon
and a Elohim City resident, Michael Brescia, whom
many people, including the government informer

Onassis, Aristotle

Carol Howe, have identified as the infamous John
Doe No. 2. The final cell handled financing—which
came in part from the proceeds of bank robberies—
and security. Led by Pete Langan, its members, says
Hamm, included Brescia again, as well as four others,
Richard Guthrie, Kevin McCarthy, Scott Stedeford,
and a Ku Klux Klan leader, Mark Thomas (Hamm,
195–196). According to this theory, the bombing is
best understood as being part of a plot to set a racebased civil war into motion and to recruit others to
the ARA’s antigovernment and revolutionary agenda.
By denying the involvement of anyone else,
McVeigh, in this scenario, was hoping to be seen as a
martyr for the cause. As Denis Mahon explained to
the journalist J. D. Cash, McVeigh was “a good soldier, who from the beginning wanted to be the fall
guy in the bombing—securing his place in history as
a patriot hero” (Hamm, 200).
Concern that the full story of those involved in
the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal
Building in Oklahoma City has yet to be told was
intensified in May 2001 when the FBI revealed,
just six days before McVeigh was due to be executed, that it had withheld more than 3,000 documents from his defense team during his trial.
McVeigh’s execution was postponed, and he was
eventually put to death by lethal injection in the
U.S. penitentiary in Terre Haute, Indiana, on 11
June 2001. A USA Today/CNN/Gallup Poll published the day after the execution revealed that “65
percent of American adults believe that McVeigh
did not name everyone who helped him build and
detonate the bomb” (Johnson).
D. J. Mulloy
See also: Militias; Pierce, William.
References
American Patriots Friends Network. “Oklahoma
City bombing Cover-Up.” http://www.apfn.org/
apfn/okc_coverup.htm.
Cobb, Kim. 2001. “John Doe No.2 Doesn’t Exist,
McVeigh Maintains in a Letter.” Houston
Chronicle, 15 May. http://www.chron.com/cs/
CDA/story.hts/topstory/909349.
Douglas, Clay. 1995. “Federal Agencies Implicated
in Oklahoma City Bombing!” The Free American.
June, 1; 3.

Grabbe, J. Orlin. 1997. “Secret Pentagon Report on
Oklahoma City Bombing—Evidence of an Inside
Job?” http://www.conspiracy-net.com/ archives/
articles/conspiracy/terrorism/CNC1a011.txt.
Hamm, Mark S. 2002. In Bad Company: America’s
Terrorist Underground. Boston, MA:
Northeastern University Press.
Herbeck, Dan, and Lou Michel. 2001. American
Terrorist: Timothy McVeigh and the Oklahoma
City Bombing. New York: Regan Books.
Jasper, William F. 2001. “Cover-up in OKC.” The
New American, 16 July. http://www.
thenewamerican.com/tna/2001/07–16–2001/
vol17no15_coverup.
Johnson, Kevin. 2001. “Death Doesn’t End
Speculation of Co-Conspirators.” USA Today,
June 12, 3A.
Jones, Stephen, and Peter Israel. 1998. Others
Unknown: The Oklahoma City Bombing Case and
Conspiracy. New York: Public Affairs.
Keith, Jim. 1996. OKBomb! Conspiracy and Coverup. Lilburn, GA: IllumniNet Press.
Mulloy, D. J., ed. 1999. Homegrown
Revolutionaries: An American Militia Reader.
Norwich, England: Arthur Miller Centre for
American Studies.
Neiwert, David. 2001. “The Mystery of John Doe
No. 2.” Salon, 9 June. http://www.salon.com/news/
feature/2001/06/09/john_doe.
Skolnick, Sherman H. n.d. “U.S. Government
Complicity in the Oklahoma Bombing.”
Conspiracy Nation 7. 44. http://www.conspiracynet.com/ archives/articles/conspiracy/conspnation/
CN744.txt.
Stern, Kenneth S. 1997. A Force upon the Plain: The
American Militia Movement and the Politics of
Hate. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Websites
The Oklahoma Bombing Investigation Committee:
http://www.okcbombing.org.
The John Doe Times: http://xld.com/public/jdt/
index.htm.

Onassis, Aristotle
As the alleged head of the international Mafia in the
1960s and 1970s, the Greek oil and shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis plays a particularly important
role in parapolitical accounts of the time. According
to conspiracy lore, Onassis built his fortune at first by
cornering the Argentinean opium market through
557

One-World Government

deals with Joseph Kennedy (John F. Kennedy’s
father), Eugene Meyer, and the mobster Meyer Lansky. He then bought every oil tanker he could in the
late 1940s and early 1950s, taking advantage of the
U.S. attempt to increase oil exports from the Middle
East. The oil flowed, along with, the story goes, drugs
and weapons to make Onassis extremely wealthy,
with far wealthier and more powerful political figures
beholden to him. Financiers then poured over a halfbillion dollars into a new class of supertankers owned
by Onassis and his brother, Stavros Spyros Niarchos.
The fleet eventually moved over 5 billion gallons of
crude oil to Western Europe by 1956, a fifth of all
Middle Eastern imported crude.
The “Gemstone File” conspiracy text, based on a
series of letters written by a man named Bruce
Roberts and summarized in a hand-circulated outline, maintains that Onassis kidnapped Howard
Hughes in 1957. According to this motherlode of
contemporary conspiracy lore, an international Mafia
run by Onassis then held Hughes captive for ten
years in his own hotels. It put the billionaire adventurer Hughes’s assets, Hughes Aircraft, and related
companies among them, under Onassis’s control.
From there, the Gemstone File details the role
played by Onassis and his associates in the assassinations of the Kennedy brothers and his subsequent
marriage to Jacqueline Kennedy, the president’s
widow. It also traces these connections to the Watergate break-in; Ted Kennedy’s disaster at Chappaquiddick and many other mob interactions with
the Rockefellers; Henry Kissinger, Richard Nixon,
and many well-known figures from the 1970s; the
Bay of Pigs; and the Watergate Plumbers E. Howard
Hunt, James McCord, Frank Sturgis, and G. Gordon
Liddy.
John F. Kennedy visited Onassis on his yacht, the
Christina, after losing the vice-presidential nomination at the Democratic Convention of 1956. The
Gemstone maintains that Onassis promised him the
presidency at that point. Six years later Onassis
invited Jackie Kennedy onto the yacht, ostensibly to
help her recover from the death of her infant son
Patrick. She came back from that visit about a month
before JFK’s murder, and Onassis was among the few
to visit her directly after it. In 1968, they started dat558

ing. Their marriage arrangement included separate
bedrooms and $750,000 allowances for Jackie and
her children. Some commentators have noted that,
in marrying President Kennedy’s widow, Onassis was
following an old Mafia dictum about shooting one’s
enemy and taking his girl, but others have seen in the
Onassis/Jackie Kennedy marriage merely a widow’s
search for protection and seclusion for her children
after the deaths of her husband and his brother.
Onassis never recovered from the loss of his son
Alexander in a plane crash near Athens in January
1973. He descended into conspiracy paranoia about
that crash, offering a $1 million reward for evidence
of wrongdoing. He died the following year.
Kenn Thomas
See also: Hughes, Howard; Kennedy, John F.,
Assassination of; Mafia.
References
Alan, Richard. 1992. The Gemstone File: Sixty Years
of Corruption and Manipulation. New York:
Crown.
Carroll, Gerald. 1994. Project Seek: Onassis,
Kennedy and the Gemstone Thesis. Carson City,
NV: Bridger House.
Caruana, Stephanie. 1972. “Skeleton Key to the
Gemstone File” (ms.)
Keith, Jim, ed. 1992. The Gemstone File. Lilburn,
GA: IllumiNet.
Thomas, Kenn, ed. 2001. Inside the Gemstone File.
Kempton, IL: Adventures Unlimited Press.

One-World Government
Many Americans, often those associated with extreme right-wing groups and fundamentalist Christian churches, believe that the trend of economic
globalization is part of a secret plot by a small group
of international bankers and powerful politicians to
erode national sovereignty and institute a one-world
government (sometimes also called the New World
Order). While there have been attempts by ambitious rulers throughout history to gain worldwide
domination—from the ancient empires of Greece
and Rome to the imperialistic ambitions of Napoleon
and Hitler—the forces of the one-world government
are said to use more deceptive means. The theory is
that they have amassed power not through the use of

One-World Government

military force, but by controlling international financial markets. Although there are many versions of the
theory, all agree that the one-world government
operates through powerful international institutions,
such as the United Nations (UN), the Council on
Foreign Relations (CFR), the Trilateral Commission
(TC), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and
the secretive Bilderberger group.
In the 1960s, the one-world government theory
was promoted by the ultra-conservative John Birch
Society. According to the Birchers, the CFR and the
TC were organs of international communism, whose
goal was to overturn democracy and replace it with a
repressive global socialist regime. In post–cold war
America, many right-wing extremist groups like the
modern militias believe the push for one-world government is the work of “international Jews” with origins in secret societies of the eighteenth century, like
Adam Weishaupt’s Bavarian Illuminati and the
Freemasons. Proof of the plot is found in Protocols of
the Elders of Zion, a forgery written in the early
twentieth century and first popularized in the United
States by Henry Ford’s “The International Jew,”
which appeared in his Dearborn Independent in the
1920s. The Protocols purport to detail the plans of a
super-secret cabal of Communist-Jews to seize world
power by manipulating international finance and
installing their own government pawns in positions of
high political office. Although they were exposed as a
forgery in 1920, the Protocols continue to be cited as
evidence of a one-world government conspiracy.
Militias and other survivalist groups further claim
that foreign troops, under the orders of the UN, are
gathering in several locations around the United
States, preparing to disarm U.S. citizens and impose
martial law. They report sightings of unmarked black
helicopters and the creation of concentration camps
where resistors will be detained once the siege
begins.
In more recent manifestations, the theory is promoted by Christian millennialists, who link the oneworld government theory to biblical prophecies of
the Last Days. According to the visions reported in
the Book of Daniel and in the Book of Revelation,
sometime after the Rapture, when Christ returns to
earth to remove the elect to heaven, a beast with ten

horns, the Antichrist, will rise from the sea to unite
“all kindreds and tongues and nations” (Rev. 13) and
rule over the earth for a period of “forty and two
months” (Rev. 13). During this time of widespread
peace, in which the Antichrist deceives mankind
into worshiping him, everyone will receive a mark
on his right hand or on his forehead bearing the
Antichrist’s name or number, 666. Those who follow
him by accepting this mark will be granted unlimited prosperity, since “no man might buy or sell, save
he that had the mark” (Rev. 13). Eventually, Christ
will once again return to earth and defeat the
Antichrist in the final battle of Armageddon. Interpreted according to these prophecies, the facts of
economic globalization offer proof of this satanic
plot, instituted by Jews and foretold in the Bible, to
turn people away from Christianity, erode national
sovereignty, and institute global governance. Rather
than a single individual, the Antichrist is often
believed to be a composite, such as the small group
of elites who control the UN, the IMF, and other
organizations. These organizations and the opening
of worldwide financial markets in treaties like the
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
offer clear signs of the Antichrist’s attempt to unite
all nations into a single federation. The ten horns of
the beast, symbolizing a ten-nation alliance, refer to
the European Union or to the members of the UN
Security Council, working to establish global
tyranny. And the mark of the beast is found in the
increasing prevalence of credit cards rather than
cash or the push to develop a national identification
card.
Jeff Insko
See also: Antisemitism; Apocalypticism; John Birch
Society; New World Order; Protocols of the Elders
of Zion.
References
Daniels, Ted, ed. 1995. A Doomsday Reader:
Prophets, Predictors, and Hucksters of Salvation.
New York: New York University Press.
Keith, Jim. 1994. Black Helicopters over America:
Strikeforce for the New World Order. Lilburn,
GA: IllumiNet Press.
Vankin, Jonathan. 1991. Conspiracies, Cover-ups,
and Crimes: Political Manipulation and Mind
Control in America. New York: Paragon House.

559

Operation Paperclip

Operation Paperclip
Between 1945 and 1955, more than 1,600 German
and Austrian technicians and scientists were
brought to the United States through a project codenamed Operation Paperclip and a series of sister
programs. Despite the fact that many of those scientists—among them Wernher von Braun, the father
of the U.S. rocket program—were rumored to be
Nazi war criminals, U.S. government and military
officials allegedly concealed information about many
of them in a major cover-up effort aimed at facilitating their legal entry into the United States. U.S. officers identified the chosen German scientists by
attaching a paperclip to their personal file.
Even before the end of World War II, U.S. scientists and military personnel had begun the search
for German scientists under Operation Paperclip’s
predecessor, Project Overcast. They felt the need
for German expertise because outstanding German
design and technology had often offset Allied
advantages of manpower during the war. Therefore,
they were particularly interested in locating experts
in rocketry, aircraft design, and aviation medicine,
to use their capabilities to shorten the war against
Japan. Hundreds of Germans were taken to interrogation centers, among them many of the scientists who had been engaged in developing the V2
rocket at the Peenemünde missile base on the
Baltic Sea under Wernher von Braun. Other prominent German scientists included von Braun’s close
associate, General Walter Dornberger; the latter’s
wartime chief of staff, Herbert Axter; the deputy
technical director, Arthur Rudolph; and an aviation
doctor, Hubertus Strughold. The group included
other scientists not involved in rocketry, such as
infectious diseases expert Walter Schreiber, desalinization specialist Konrad Schaefer, and Kurt Blome,
who was engaged in biological warfare research.
U.S. government agencies decided that the
United States should secure their services permanently and allow them to immigrate. The reasons for
the apparent willingness of government and army
officials to overlook and actively conceal information
about German scientists’ active involvement in war
crimes were manifold. In addition to exploiting German technical know-how, the process assured that
560

Germany could not use its scientists and their
knowledge to rebuild its forces. Finally, an intense
competition for German technical expertise, not
only with the Soviet Union, but also with France and
Great Britain, triggered a policy of denial born out
of the fear that America’s competitors could tip the
strategic balance in their favor. Therefore, the StateWar-Navy Coordinating Committee formulated the
policy paper SWNCC 257/5, which allowed the
admittance of specialists from Germany in the
national interest. This required a special policy as
U.S. immigration law forbade the entry of members
of fascist organizations. Official Paperclip policy prohibited the utilization of war criminals or active
Nazis, but did not explicitly rule out nominal party
members. According to Linda Hunt, a former CNN
investigative reporter, who was the first researcher
to have access to formerly closed material, the first
background checks of possible candidates for Project Paperclip by the Joint Intelligence Objectives
Agency (JIOA)—the agency under the Joint Chiefs
of Staff responsible for the implementation of the
operation—revealed that many had participated in
brutalized slave labor and experiments on humans,
and had committed other crimes. Therefore, State
Department officials, especially the liaison to the
JIOA, Samuel Klaus, refused to accept many of the
applicants, believing that Nazi war criminals constituted a threat to U.S. security. In reaction to this
deadlock between the State Department and the
JIOA, the latter apparently advised the army to withhold or change incriminating dossiers about German scientists. The report on Wernher von Braun
from September 1948, for example, described him
as a potential security threat. Five months later the
army had upgraded his classification to the role of a
mere opportunist.
The expertise the Germans brought with them
played a vital role in the U.S. space program, in particular in the development of the Saturn rockets and
the astronauts’ preparation for high-altitude flying.
For decades, government agencies and the public
were not concerned that alleged Nazi war criminals
lived in the United States and were employed in
government programs and private corporations. The
mid-1970s saw the first legislative investigations into

Opinion Polls about Conspiracy Theories

the matter, partly due to a growing awareness that
the last survivors of the Holocaust and slave labor
would die soon. A subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee under the leadership of Joshua Eilberg (D-PA) held hearings in 1977 and 1978. Its
members concluded that government agencies had
been more concerned about Communist propaganda than bringing these criminals to justice. Partly
as a result of these deliberations, the Office of Special Investigations (OSI) was founded in 1979, with
the goal to locate and try Nazi war criminals living in
the United States. It renewed its efforts after the
opening of Russian archives to U.S. OSI researchers
in the early 1990s, but due to the death of most suspects their investigations are destined to be short
lived. As most Germans who participated in Operation Paperclip entered the United States legally,
none of them have been prosecuted.
Christoph Schiessl
See also: Atomic Secrets; Cold War.
References
Bower, Tom. 1987. The Paperclip Conspiracy: The
Battle for the Spoils and Secrets of Nazi
Germany. London: Grafton Books.
Gimbel, John. “Project Paperclip: German
Scientists, American Policy, and the Cold War.”
Diplomatic History 14: 343–365.
Hunt, Linda. 1991. Secret Agenda: The United
States Government, Nazi Scientists, and Project
Paperclip, 1945 to 1990. New York: St. Martin’s
Press.

Opinion Polls about Conspiracy Theories
According to polls, most Americans today agree that
the scenario posed by at least one popular conspiracy theory is very likely or somewhat likely. On
25–29 June 1997, a survey was conducted of 1,009
people nationwide, with participants from every
state and the District of Columbia. Guido H. Stempel III, distinguished professor of the EW Scripps
School of Journalism at Ohio University and
Thomas Hargrove of the Scripps Howard News Service conducted the survey. The results have a 4 percent margin of error with a 95 percent confidence

interval, meaning that the results are projectable to
all U.S. households 95 times out of 100 plus or
minus 4 percentage points. At that time:
• More than half (51 percent) believe it is very
likely or somewhat likely that government
officials were “directly responsible for the
assassination of President Kennedy.”
• More than half (60 percent) believe is likely
that military officials covered up the dangers
of the Agent Orange chemical.
• Four-fifths (80 percent) believe it is likely that
military officials are covering up information
about U.S. soldiers’ exposure to nerve gas or
germ warfare in the Gulf War.
• More than one-third (40 percent) believe it is
likely that the FBI burned down the Branch
Davidian compound in Waco, Texas.
• More than half (52 percent) believe it is likely
that the CIA allowed drug dealers from Central America to sell crack cocaine to African
Americans in U.S. inner cities.
• More than one-third believe it is likely the
navy shot down TWA Flight 800 either intentionally or accidentally.
Respondents were asked if the above situations were
likely to some degree. The above responses included
the “very likely” and “somewhat likely” answers.
Note that believing that something is “somewhat
likely” may be the admission of possibility, not a firm
belief.
JFK Assassination
Most Americans say that more than one person was
involved in the JFK assassination. A Gallup Poll was
conducted 26–28 March 2001 with telephone interviews of a randomly selected sample of 1,024 adults
aged 18 and older. The results are projectable to all
U.S. households with a 95 percent confidence and
3 percent margin of error. At that time, when asked,
“Do you think that one man was responsible for the
assassination of President Kennedy, or do you think
that others were involved in a conspiracy?”—with
the possible answers “one man,” “others involved”
and “no opinion”:
561

Opinion Polls about Conspiracy Theories

• Fourth-fifths (81 percent) responded that
they believed that other people were involved
in a conspiracy to assassinate President
Kennedy, an all-time high.
The historical results of this poll, which has been conducted
periodically by Gallup since 1964, are as follows:

March 2001
November 1993
February 1992*
October 1983*
December 1976**
December 1966**
November 1963**

One Man

Others Involved

No Opinion

13%
15%
10%
11%
11%
36%
29%

81%
75%
77%
74%
81%
50%
52%

6%
10%
13%
15%
9%
15%
19%

*Wording included, “one man, Lee Harvey Oswald . . .”
**Slight variations in wording:
1963—“Do you think that the man who shot President Kennedy
acted on his own, or was some group or element also responsible?”
1966—“Do you think that one man was responsible for the assassination of President Kennedy, or do you think others were
involved?”
1976—“Do you think that one man was responsible for the assassination of President Kennedy, or do you think others were
involved?”

In the 1997 Scripps Howard News Service/Ohio
University nationwide poll, the question concerned
not more than one person, but government officials
with direct involvement in the assassination of President Kennedy in 1963. The poll discovered:

to infect black people,” versus one in twenty
(5 percent) among white New Yorkers.
• More than half (60 percent) of black New
Yorkers indicated belief that the government
“deliberately” made drugs available to poor
black people, versus a little more than one in
ten (12 percent) among white New Yorkers.
In another 1990 survey, reported in the 2 November 1995 edition of the Boston Globe:
• More than one-third (34 percent) of black
churchgoers polled in five cities agreed “the
AIDS virus was produced in a germ warfare
laboratory.”
The 1997 Scripps Howard News Service/Ohio
University nationwide poll discovered:
• More than half (52 percent) of Americans
believe it likely that the CIA allowed drug
dealers from Central America to sell crack
cocaine to African Americans in U.S. inner
cities.

AIDS and Drugs
A sizable number of people would agree with at
least one of the accusations that the government
manufactured AIDS or made drugs available in
inner cities to attack African Americans. In a 1990
poll, reported in the 29 October 1990 edition of the
New York Times:

Pearl Harbor
About one in three Americans say that President
Roosevelt knew about the attack on Pearl Harbor in
advance. The Gallup Organization reports that in
December 1941, 84 percent of Americans said the
president had done “everything he should have to
prevent war with Japan,” with only 9 percent disagreeing.
Fifty years later, in 1991, Gallup found that
nearly one-third of Americans (31 percent) agreed
with the statement, “Roosevelt knew about Japanese plans to bomb Pearl Harbor but did nothing
about it because he wanted an excuse to involve the
United States on the side of the Allies in the war,”
with 47 percent disagreeing and 22 percent with no
opinion. As an interesting side note, 19 percent said
they still have not forgiven the Japanese.

• Nearly one-third (29 percent) of black New
Yorkers indicated belief that AIDS was
“deliberately created in a laboratory in order

Moon Landings
The conspiracy theory that the moon landings were
a fake is less popular. A Gallup Poll was conducted

• More than half (51 percent) of Americans
believe it is very likely or somewhat likely that
government officials were “directly responsible for the assassination of President
Kennedy.”

562

Opinion Polls about Conspiracy Theories

13–14 July 1999 with telephone interviews of a randomly selected sample of 1,061 adults aged 18 and
older. The results are projectable to all U.S. households with a 95 percent confidence and a 3 percent
margin of error. When asked, “Thinking about the
space exploration, do you think the government
staged or faked the Apollo moon landing, or don’t
you feel that way?”—with answers being, “Yes,
staged,” “No,” and “No opinion”:
• Less than one in ten (6 percent) believes that
the landing was faked while nearly nine in ten
(89 percent) do not believe that the lunar
landing was faked or staged.
Time/CNN/Yakelovich Partners, Inc., conducted
a similar poll 19–20 July 1995, with virtually identical wording, and produced similar results:
• Less than one in ten (6 percent) believes that
the landing was faked while more than fourfifths (83 percent) do not believe that the
lunar landing was faked or staged.
UFOs
Many Americans say that the government is hiding
information about UFOs. In the 1997 survey conducted by Guido H. Stempel III of the EW Scripps
School of Journalism at Ohio University and
Thomas Hargrove of the Scripps Howard News
Service mentioned above, nearly half of Americans
(47 percent) indicated that it is very likely or somewhat likely that “The U.S. Air Force is withholding
proof of the existence of intelligent life from other
planets.”
Another study, sponsored by the SCI FI Channel
and conducted 23–25 August by RoperASW, found
that 72 percent of Americans believe the “government is not telling the public everything it knows
about UFO activity,” and 68 percent believe the
“government knows more about extraterrestrial
life” than it says. The study was conducted among a
representative example of 1,021 adults aged 18 and
over, with a margin of error of +3 percent.
Further, 60 percent of respondents in the RoperASW poll said the government “should not with-

hold information about UFO sightings,” while 58
percent said the government shouldn’t conceal
information about “potential encounters with extraterrestrial life.”
Trust in Government
The above RoperASW study also discussed the
issue of trust in government. The same poll found
that about half of Americans (53 percent) say their
“level of trust in the government has remained stable over the past five years,” while 29 percent say
they trust the government “less than they did five
years ago.” More than half of Americans (55 percent) said the government “does not share enough
information with the public in general.”
After the Oklahoma City bombing, a poll was conducted by the Gallup organization that found that 39
percent of Americans believed that the federal government had become too powerful and large and
therefore was a threat to the freedoms and rights of
average citizens.
In 2000, this number increased to 45 percent,
with 51 percent disagreeing that the federal government poses such a threat. The 2000 study was conducted 7–9 April 2000 among a randomly selected
national sample of 1,006 adults aged 18 and over,
with a margin of error of +3 percent.
Craig DiLouie
See also: Agent Orange; AIDS; African Americans;
CIA; Drugs; Kennedy, John F., Assassination of;
Oklahoma City Bombing; Pearl Harbor; UFOs;
Waco.
References
The Gallup Organization. 2001. “Americans Say
Sept. 11 Will Be More Historically Significant
Than Pearl Harbor.” 7 December.
———. 2001. “Poll on Beliefs among U.S. Public in
Conspiracy in JFK Assassination.” 26–28 March.
———. 1999. “Poll on Beliefs among U.S. Public
regarding Apollo Lunar Landing.” 13–14 July.
———. 2000. “Poll on U.S. Beliefs regarding
Terrorism and Oklahoma City Bombing.” 7–9
April.
Pipes, Daniel. 1997. Conspiracy: How the Paranoid
Style Flourishes and Where It Comes From. New
York: Free Press.
RoperASW and the SCI FI Channel. 2002. “Poll on
U.S. Beliefs in UFO Activity.” 23–25 August.

563

Oswald, Lee Harvey

Stempel, Guido H., and Thomas Hargrove. 1997.
“National Poll on Beliefs in Conspiracy Theories
among U.S. Public.” 25–29 June.
Time/CNN/Yakelovich Partners, Inc. 1995.
“Time/CNN National Poll among U.S. Public
regarding Apollo Lunar Landing.” 19–20 July.

Oswald, Lee Harvey
Lee Harvey Oswald (1939–1963) has been U.S.
“Public Enemy #1” ever since his posthumous conviction in the court of popular opinion for the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in 1963. For
most people, his supposed acts in Dallas on 22
November 1963 remain the single most memorable
event of Oswald’s short life. Nevertheless, the facts
and enigmas of his twenty-four years have inspired
as much scholarly debate and public controversy as
any number of longer-lived, more colorful and
influential U.S. antiheroes such as J. Edgar Hoover,
Jimmy Hoffa, or Richard Nixon. To this day, there
is no firm consensus regarding his actions in those
fateful hours or the circumstances leading to them,
although in recent years the balance of popular and
scholarly opinion has begun to favor the theory that
he was involved—perhaps unwittingly—in some
kind of conspiracy to assassinate the president.
From Communist Novice to U.S. Marine
Born on 18 November 1939 in a downtrodden
neighborhood of New Orleans, Louisiana, Oswald
had a family life that was, by any standards, unsettled. Although his father’s early death meant that
Lee’s childhood was, like that of many youngsters
born during the war, dominated by his mother, it is
fair to say that Marguerite Oswald was a remarkable
character. A succession of relationships and family
connections with figures on the fringes of organized
crime have proven fertile ground for conspiracy
researchers like Anthony Summers and Peter Dale
Scott, who have often depicted these connections as
the source of Lee’s own involvement with the Mafia
and other groups during his later years. Certainly, the
family’s poverty and rootless wanderings across the
Deep South and the Bronx seem to have acted as a
catalyst in the young man’s political education. By the
564

age of sixteen, already a frequent truant and briefly
an inmate of the Bronx’s Youth House correctional
institute, Oswald had begun to describe himself as a
Communist. He claimed to have been won over to
the beleaguered U.S. Left by the plight of the Rosenbergs, whose ongoing court case brought about a
short-lived revival of the Communist Party’s fortunes
in the early 1950s. From his own fascinating but still
unpublished writings, and the hundreds of pages of
testimony given during the official inquiry into
Kennedy’s death, the picture emerges of a hostile,
potentially violent and impressionable youngster
who was inflamed by the lurid rhetoric of the Left
and turned to the uncompromising radicalism of the
Communist movement at the height of McCarthyism. Borne out by contemporary school reports, and
lent credence by the careers of other leftists and
political assassins like Leon Czolgosz, killer of President McKinley in 1901, this became the standard
narrative of Oswald’s early years.
However, the interpretation of Oswald as a loner
has not convinced everyone. In some accounts he
emerges as a typical teenager, prone to scrapping
with his peers and voicing extreme opinions maybe,
but hardly a callous agent of U.S. communism steeling himself for a final conflict with the U.S. establishment. For one thing, Oswald never actually joined
either the Communist Party (CPUSA) or any of the
other leftist groups like the Socialist Workers Party
(SWP) with whom he frequently corresponded. Even
more significant, in 1956, having left school the previous year, he enlisted with that bastion of U.S.
neoimperialism, the U.S. Marine Corps (USMC).
Early scores from aptitude tests and other assessments of his conduct and proficiency taken during his
military service all reveal a slightly below-average
performer. For obvious reasons, his ability with a rifle
has long been the subject of fierce controversy on
which the most that can be said with any certainty is
that, while not an exceptional marksman, he was far
from the worst in his unit. That he could have accomplished the fatal, once-in-a-lifetime result in Dealey
Plaza was asserted first by the Warren Commission
following lengthy ballistics tests, and is a conclusion
recently bolstered by computer assessments performed for Gerald Posner’s 1993 book, Case Closed.

Oswald, Lee Harvey

For many other authors, however, the extraordinary,
almost superhuman performance Oswald would have
needed to achieve on the day, together with analysis
of the wounds on the president’s body, is enough in
itself to imply the presence of a much larger team of
gunmen installed in various positions around the
Plaza, and therefore, by definition, a conspiratorial
interpretation of the event.
Certainly, Oswald’s military career was unorthodox, and this period has been subjected to increasing scrutiny by conspiracy theorists. He seems to
have made no secret of his Marxist leanings and
indeed continued to learn Russian and subscribe to
Pravda, facts that undoubtedly marked him out as
highly suspect among fellow marines in the midst of
the cold war. No less anomalous were his bizarre
assignations with members of the local leftist and
criminal underworld while on maneuvers in the
South China Sea. For Edward Epstein, one of the
pioneers of Kennedy assassination conspiracy theory, these mysterious connections, coupled with his
training in sensitive radar-control techniques as part
of the U-2 spy plane program, point toward the
presence of intelligence communities on one side or
other of the Iron Curtain influencing his actions.
Recently, following Epstein, other writers, including
Anthony Summers and former army intelligence
officer John Newman, have explored the possibility
that Oswald may have been recruited by U.S. military intelligence to work as a “deep cover” agent in
the Soviet Union. This is one of the theories dramatized in Oliver Stone’s controversial movie JFK
(1992), itself based on the writings of Jim Garrison
and Jim Marrs, and it certainly provides a plausible
explanation for the wealth of unanswered questions
in the standard narrative of Oswald’s military service
established by the Warren Commission.
Oswald’s Russian Years
In spite of their suspicions of his left-wing interests
and tendencies, few of Oswald’s fellow marines could
have predicted his dramatic next move. In the summer of 1959, after his discharge from the USMC,
Oswald began to set in train a complicated plan that
would result in his defection to and residence in the
then Soviet Union. This act—impressive in itself

given his youth—has, like every other aspect of his
life, been scrutinized for evidence of the hidden
hand of possible agents of conspiracy. And for good
reason: on 31 October 1959, he presented himself to
the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, saying that not only
did he wish to renounce his American citizenship,
but that he also planned to furnish Soviet intelligence
with the military secrets he had learned during his
training in the U-2 program. After several months of
unhappy isolation in the Metropole Hotel in
Moscow, during which he met future biographer—
and suspected CIA agent—Priscilla McMillan, and
even attempted suicide, Oswald was finally sent on a
“Stateless Persons Identity Document” to the industrial city of Minsk, in the province of Belorussia. That
Minsk was located near an espionage training school,
and that he was supported by a Soviet government
allowance that amounted to a small fortune in the
Soviet Union, has led some commentators to speculate that he may indeed have passed intelligence to
his hosts, in return for which he was given the “red
carpet” treatment.
In any event, Oswald would remain in the Soviet
Union for around three years, working in the
Belorussian radio and television factory and socializing with some decidedly suspicious members of
Minsk society. When, in April 1961, he married a
young student named Marina Prusakova—whose
own family background is thought to have been
tainted by her stepfather’s involvement in Stalin’s
purges of the 1930s and 1940s—it seems that the
weight of Soviet intelligence and surveillance was
brought to bear on the American defector. Certainly,
the couple’s every conversation in their relatively luxurious apartment overlooking the Svisloch River was
now recorded and monitored by local KGB agents.
Whether or not this was because Oswald represented a valuable intelligence source and potential
agent or was merely an asset in the cold war diplomatic chess game remains unclear. However, the balance of evidence from sources such as the frequently
unreliable Soviet defector Yuri Nosenko and Norman Mailer’s extensive research for his book
Oswald’s Tale (1995) now suggests that, after their
initial interest in Oswald, the KGB quickly lost faith
in his value as a potential operative.
565

Oswald, Lee Harvey

In spite of the circumstances of his defection,
Oswald soon grew disillusioned with life in the
Soviet Union. To judge from the large and compelling body of essays, diaries, and letters he produced during his time in Minsk, it is clear that, like
many other ideological defectors, he was most distressed by the gap between Communist rhetoric and
Soviet realities, and by the regimented, repressive
conditions inside Khrushchev’s empire. In fact, at
around the same time as he met Marina, Oswald
had reopened negotiations with the U.S. Embassy.
There followed well over a year of diplomatic wrangling, including several dangerous, illegal visits to
Moscow and hostile KGB interrogations of his wife.
Finally, early in 1962, Lee secured exit visas for himself and his family. For some conspiracy critics like
Anthony Summers and Jim Marrs, the progress of
the Oswalds’ return to the United States appears to
have been far too smooth, especially given Lee’s
record of anti-American statements and actions.
Likewise, the departure of Marina and their baby
daughter June seems to have been achieved with a
striking lack of the usual Soviet bureaucratic
obstruction. Having said all that, according to some
of Posner’s and Mailer’s intelligence sources, the
Soviets may simply have been glad to see the back of
this troublesome family. On balance, it seems that,
just like in the United States during his teenage
years, Oswald had proved unable to keep his criticism of the Soviet regime to himself and had made
many powerful enemies in the Soviet Union.
Oswald the New Leftist?
Oswald spent his last eighteen months in the southern cities of New Orleans and Dallas. During this
period, according to the story established by the
Warren Commission, he gave every sign of seeking
to create for himself a reputation as a dynamic and
forceful radical. In these months, he was in regular
contact with several of the remaining parties of the
U.S. Left, including the CPUSA and the SWP, as
well as parties of the “New Left” such as the Fair
Play for Cuba Committee (FPCC), which, due to the
rise of Fidel Castro’s socialist regime, could claim
scores of powerful supporters in the early 1960s. In
addition to the various series of correspondence
566

between Oswald and the leaders of these parties,
many of which are contained among the Hearings
and Exhibits of the Warren Commission and make
fascinating reading, there are also several texts—
apparently written for his wife in the event of his
imprisonment—in which Oswald apparently seeks
to justify an assassination attempt on Major General
Edwin Walker. As one of the South’s most aggressive
segregationists and John Birch Society leaders—and,
ironically, an enemy of Attorney General Robert
Kennedy—Walker was certainly a natural target for
a leftist, especially one like Oswald, who is remembered at this time as being an outspoken advocate of
desegregation. That Oswald confessed to his wife
and others to having taken a shot at the general in
April 1963 was, for obvious reasons, seized upon by
the Warren Commission as evidence of an existing
propensity to act out his leftist beliefs in a violent and
potentially murderous way.
And yet, as with every other event in his life, the
circumstances of Oswald’s attempt on Walker’s life
become more mysterious the more scrutiny is paid
them. Indeed, in these confusing last months,
Oswald’s actions seem to have become even less
comprehensible and more subject to debate. As the
House Select Committee on Assassinations found
during their reinvestigation of the case in the late
1970s, there is evidence to suggest that Oswald was
not alone outside Walker’s house on the night of the
shooting, and that he may well have attended several
of the right-wing extremist’s rallies and meetings in
the months thereafter. Such suspicions, fleshed out
by later conspiracy critics like Anthony Summers,
raise the contentious but central question of the
nature of Oswald’s political affiliations, and how they
may have run contrary to his stated opinions at this
time. If relations with his wife abruptly deteriorated
after their arrival in the United States, then Oswald
was certainly consorting with a bizarre cast of radicals and activists of both Left and Right. One of
these obscure figures was George de Mohrenshildt,
a shadowy Russian exile and flamboyant businessman with provocative connections in the worlds of
U.S. intelligence and organized crime in the United
States and Latin America. According to Norman
Mailer’s account of the strange friendship that devel-

Oswald, Lee Harvey

oped between the two men, de Mohrenshildt was
most likely a CIA contract agent charged with the
task of debriefing Oswald about his experiences
behind the Iron Curtain. However, this may well
have been only half the story. For Peter Dale Scott,
the same person was instrumental in embroiling
Oswald in what the author describes as the “deep
politics” of “gray alliance” between active elements
of the intelligence, Mafia, corporate, and extremist
political communities in the southern states. Certainly, there was more to Oswald’s relationship with
de Mohrenshildt than the Warren Commission were
prepared to concede in their report, in spite of the
unsettling evidence to the contrary that they suppressed when it was published in 1964.
Much of this evidence, and indeed the most continually perplexing aspect of Oswald’s life as a whole,
concerns his involvement in the complicated politics
of Cuban-American relations throughout his last
eighteen months. On the face of it, the stories of
Oswald single-handedly establishing a cell of the
FPCC in the hostile environs of New Orleans would
seem in keeping with the Warren Commission’s narrative of a radical activist growing increasingly dissatisfied with the parties of the Old Left, and searching for an alternative model in the politics of Third
World revolution. Certainly someone, if not Oswald
himself, seems to have been careful to create a convincing paper trail indicating the presence of such a
figure, including extensive correspondence with
Vincent Lee, then general secretary of the FPCC,
appearances in the New Orleans news media, and
even a trip to Mexico City, ostensibly to present
himself as a potential defector to the Cuban Embassy. And yet now, after many years of research into
just this aspect of the case, there exists a substantial
body of evidence to suggest that Oswald’s connections and activities at this time were far less straightforward. For one thing, according to many accounts,
he appears to have been in contact with both proand anti-Castro forces massing in New Orleans and
other cities in 1962–1963. While he undoubtedly
was in touch with members of the FPCC and other
groups, it also appears that Oswald was working—
perhaps as a double agent—with a much larger
group of anti-Castro Cuban exiles then being coor-

dinated by the CIA and financed by their allies in
the national organized-crime network. It is for this
reason that his name has been plausibly linked with
a range of key players in the underground world of
deep politics, including Mafia generals and footmen
such as Santos Trafficante, Sam Giancana, John
Roselli, and his own future killer Jack Ruby; rogue
CIA contract agents like George de Mohrenshildt,
David Ferrie, and Guy Bannister; and renowned
local Cuban exile leaders like Carlos Bringuier and
Antonio Veciana, who had links with both. Although
they characteristically use these various suspicious
connections as a way of exploring the much larger
question of the possible nature of a JFK assassination conspiracy rather than clarifying Oswald’s precise role in such a conspiracy, the work of authors
such as Anthony Summers, Peter Dale Scott, and
Jim Marrs has served to debunk the Warren Commission’s central conclusion that Oswald acted
throughout his life as a “lone agent.”
Oswald’s Death
Oswald’s own death, no less than that of President
Kennedy, remains shrouded in mystery. According to
the official record of marathon interrogation sessions
conducted by the combined forces of the Dallas
Police Department, FBI, and the Secret Service
between 22 and 24 November 1963, Oswald was initially arrested for the shooting of Patrolman J. D.
Tippit during his supposed getaway dash from
Dealey Plaza. Within twelve hours, he had also been
charged with President Kennedy’s murder. In all that
time, he remained unrepresented by legal counsel, in
spite of repeated calls to renowned left-wing lawyer
John Abt. If the legal profession apparently distanced
itself from Oswald, the international press corps
were an almost constant presence; according to one
contemporary estimate, over 300 representatives of
the news media descended on the Dallas Police
Department, creating a media circus. In a remarkably short time, a detailed account of Oswald’s defection and leftist career had emerged, presumably
from the FBI, who had long maintained a file on
him, and had been fed to the waiting press. Oswald’s
“fifteen minutes of fame” came to an abrupt end,
however, on the morning of Sunday, 24 November,
567

Oswald, Lee Harvey

when, en route to Captain J. Will Fritz’s office for a
further round of questioning, he was shot dead by
local club-owner and small-time mafioso Jack Ruby.
Ever since his death, there have been many who
have maintained that the official record of that dark
and chaotic weekend was woefully inadequate. For
some, Ruby’s sudden appearance among the police
officials and newsmen at precisely the moment
Oswald emerged from his temporary jail cell leaves
the strong suspicion that the killer was forewarned
by someone on the inside. This has led some authors
to explore Ruby’s links with corrupt elements within
the Dallas law-enforcement community. No less significant is the possibility that Oswald may have
known both Tippit, whose involvement in several
right-wing enclaves has long been suspected, and
Jack Ruby. For the 1979 Assassinations Committee,
such suspicions aligned with their conclusion that, if
there was a conspiracy to kill the president, it was
undoubtedly instigated by the Mafia in collaboration
with extreme right-wing elements, both of which
would have had a vested interest in silencing Oswald
soon after his arraignment for the murder.
Oswald’s Disputed Legacy
In the forty years since his death, Oswald’s reputation and the meaning of his actions and possible
affiliations have played a central role in our comprehension of the Kennedy assassination. Over the
years, he has been seen as an archetypal psychopath
or “lone gunman” with delusions of political agency,
and as a scapegoat or “patsy” for the larger machinations of secret, unaccountable branches of the socalled shadow government like the FBI, the CIA,
and the Mafia. Between those two extremes,
Oswald was briefly reclaimed in the late 1960s by
the Weathermen, a terrorist offshoot of the Black
Panther Party, some of whose members cited him
as a role model of direct action and carried his
iconic image on their posters. More recently, reflecting increasing interest in some of the CIA’s
more esoteric operations, several writers have
sought to explain Oswald’s paradoxical behavior and
radical shifts of allegiance as evincing the influence
of covert mind-control and “parapsychological”

568

experiments carried out by the CIA as part of the
MK-ULTRA program.
Complementing the research of political and
social historians, Oswald’s singular odyssey has also
inspired some of the best work by major novelists
such as Norman Mailer and Don DeLillo. In
DeLillo’s Libra (1988), for instance, the specific
nature of Oswald’s involvement in the assassination
is left deliberately unresolved, his story told in dramatic counterpoint to the convoluted plans of rogue
secret agents and political extremists. On the other
hand, in Mailer’s recent account, Oswald emerges as
the culmination of that pantheon of lone agents like
D.J. from Why Are We in Vietnam? (1967) and Gary
Gilmore in The Executioner’s Song (1979), whose
violence and psychoses have long populated the
author’s fiction. Regardless of his culpability or otherwise in the murder of President Kennedy, the figure of the lone gunman, as much the product of the
Warren Commission’s influential interpretation of
them as of Oswald’s own actions, has become a
recurrent character-type in popular media and literary fiction alike, from Robert DeNiro’s Travis Bickle
in Taxi Driver (1976) to the villains of recent movies
such as In the Line of Fire (1993), Speed (1994), and
Seven (1996).
Dorian Hayes
See also: Bay of Pigs Invasion; Brussell, Mae;
Castro, Fidel; Central Intelligence Agency; DeLillo,
Don; Federal Bureau of Investigation; John Birch
Society; Kennedy, John F., Assassination of; Mailer,
Norman; MK-ULTRA; Ruby, Jack; Stone, Oliver;
Warren Commission; Weathermen.
References
DeLillo, Don. Libra. 1988. New York: Viking.
Epstein, Edward Jay. 1978. Legend: The Secret World
of Lee Harvey Oswald. London: Hutchison.
Garrison, Jim. 1988. On the Trail of the Assassins.
New York: Sheridan Square.
Hayes, Dorian P. 2001. “The Politics of the Witness:
Lee Harvey Oswald, Life-Writing, and the
American Left.” Ph.D diss., University of East
Anglia, England.
Mailer, Norman. 1995. Oswald’s Tale: An American
Mystery. New York: Random House.
Marrs, Jim. 1989. Crossfire: The Plot that Killed
Kennedy. New York: Carroll and Graf.

Oswald, Lee Harvey

McMillan, Priscilla. 1977. Marina and Lee. London:
Collins.
Posner, Gerald. 1993. Case Closed: Lee Harvey
Oswald and the Assassination of President
Kennedy. New York: Random House.
President’s Commission on the Assassination of
President John F. Kennedy. 1964. Report and 26
vols. of Hearings and Exhibits. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
Scott, Peter Dale. [1977] 1993. Crime and CoverUp: The CIA, the Mafia, and the DallasWatergate Connection. New and rev. ed. Santa
Barbara, CA: Open Archive Press.
———. [1993] 1996. Deep Politics and the Death of
JFK. New and rev. ed. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

Shackleford, Martin. 1992. “Lee Harvey Oswald:
The Myth of the Loner.” Fair Play, May-June.
http://home.earthlink.net/~jkelin1/fp.html.
Summers, Anthony. [1980] 1997. The Kennedy
Conspiracy? New and rev. ed. New York:
Random House.
U.S. House. 1979. Select Committee on
Assassinations. Report and 12 vols. of Hearings
and Exhibits. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Websites
JFK Assassination: http://www.mcadams.posc.mu.edu.
Lee Harvey Oswald Research Page: http://www.
madbbs.com/~tracy/lho/index.htm.
Lee Harvey Oswald in Russia: http://www.
russianbooks.org/oswald-in-russia.htm.

569

P
Pakula, Alan J.
Filmmaker Alan J. Pakula (1928–1998) is best known
for his direction of films that have been collectively
termed the “paranoia trilogy,” consisting of Klute
(1971), The Parallax View (1974), and All the President’s Men (1976). While these films chart a general
trajectory from private to public paranoia and belief
in conspiracy, Fredric Jameson states that the trademark of Pakula’s most successful films is that they cut
across “the traditional opposition between public and
private” (Jameson, 52). Pakula produced and wrote
films and began directing with The Sterile Cuckoo
(1969). He later made films such as Sophie’s Choice
(1982), the political conspiracy thriller The Pelican
Brief (1993), and his final work, The Devil’s Own
(1997).
The paranoia trilogy is unified by the cinematography of Gordon Willis, who produced a stark visual
representation of paranoia, as well as by a thematic
concern with surveillance and the connection between conspiracy and the process of investigation.
Klute details a missing persons investigation in which
Bree Daniels (Jane Fonda) is scrutinized by murderer Peter Cable (Charles Cioffi) and private investigator John Klute (Donald Sutherland), and plagued
by her own increasing paranoia. Daniels’s unease can
be linked to contemporary social forces, such as the
changes initiated by the burgeoning feminist movement. With its recurring use of audiotapes as a visual
and aural theme, Klute presciently evokes the social
paranoia of the Watergate era, the direct subject
matter of All the President’s Men.

Based on the book by Carl Bernstein and Bob
Woodward, All the President’s Men follows the investigation of the Watergate burglary as it becomes
increasingly linked to the White House. The Nixon
administration deceit, manipulation, and paranoia
that led to the break-in are replicated by the investigation of journalists Woodward (Robert Redford)
and Bernstein (Dustin Hoffman). But The Parallax
View epitomizes the U.S. conspiracy film canon. It
invokes the social unease that followed the assassination of John F. Kennedy, the findings of the Warren
Commission, and subsequent assassinations. After
the assassination of Senator Charles Carroll (Bill
Joyce), reporter Joe Frady (Warren Beatty) uncovers
“The Parallax Corporation,” a conspiratorial security
company that recruits assassins and “patsies.” The
film’s most famous sequence, “The Parallax Test,” is
a dazzling montage of images and words that suggests the pervasive interrelation and reach of paranoia and conspiratorial belief that had become prevalent in U.S. society.
Karen Gai Dean
See also: Film and Conspiracy Theory; Kennedy,
John F., Assassination of; Watergate.
Reference
Jameson, Fredric. 1992. The Geopolitical Aesthetic:
Cinema and Space in the World System.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Pan Am 103
On 21 December 1988, Pan Am Flight 103, en
route from London to New York, exploded over
571

Pan Am 103

Lockerbie, Scotland just half an hour after departure, killing 259 passengers and crew and 9 people
on the ground. A bomb was suspected, and authorities recovered the “black box” (the flight voice
recorder and data recorder) and examined radar evidence. Britain’s Air Accident Investigation Branch
(AAIB) and Scottish detectives collected 35,000
photographs and interviewed 15,000 people, but it
was the discovery of an electronic timer circuit
board, which had been placed in a Toshiba cassette
player and then loaded into a piece of Samsonite
luggage, that provided the necessary clues as to the
source of the plane’s destruction.
The subsequent investigation, as with the later
crash of TWA Flight 800, produced endless analysis,
suspicion, claims, and counterclaims. Victims’ families wanted someone to blame; politicians wanted to
establish whether the event was an attack; and conspiracy theorists tried to insert the event into existing theories of global politics. Although the explosion occurred while George Bush was president,
links were quickly made to President Ronald Reagan, and then, during the investigation and trial, to
President Bill Clinton. Ultimately, a vast array of
individuals and organizations were implicated in
some way or another to the explosion.
The AAIB, led by forensic expert James Thomas
Thurman, found the small circuit board in the debris,
and could trace the scrap of the circuit board to a
Swiss manufacturer. This, in association with specimens from two types of chemicals used to manufacture Semtex, a plastic explosive, convinced authorities there was a bomb aboard the plane that was
triggered by a timing device. In 1989, the 350 tons of
debris was reassembled at an army base near Carlisle.
Investigators then examined the evidence and concluded that it was a bomb, or, in their words, an “intentional explosive device.” The cockpit voice recorder verified a tremendous sound just prior to the
aircraft going down, and burn marks on luggage indicated that something exploded in the luggage compartment.
Although at first Iran was suspected of what the
authorities viewed as a bombing—although the word
“bomb” did not appear in the actual report, but
rather “improvised explosive device”—the timer
572

shifted the investigation to two Libyan intelligence
agents, Abdel Basset al-Megrahi and Lameen “The
Egg” Fhima, who were indicted in 1991 and named
by both British and U.S. governments as the culprits.
There were, however, numerous other theories
and suspects:
• Ahmed Jibril, head of the General Command
of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine (PFLP-GC). Supported by Syria,
the PFLP hated Israel and wanted to punish
the United States for its support of the Jewish
State. Conspiracy theorists claim that Jibril,
however, could not be brought to justice
because Palestine is not a sovereign state or a
member of the United Nations. This conspiracy theory is also tied to Iran, which supposedly bankrolled the operation, but Syria could
not be implicated because, by the time the
United States learned all the details, it was
involved in the Gulf War and President
George Bush needed Syria as part of the
coalition to defeat Saddam Hussein.
• Iran. One of the most widely held conspiracy
theories is that Iranian agents blew Pan Am
103 out of the skies in retaliation for an incident that occurred in July 1988 when the
USS Vincennes, mistaking an Iranian passenger aircraft for a hostile plane over the Straits
of Hormuz, shot down the Iranian plane filled
with civilians, killing 290. Iranian leaders
vowed to “avenge the blood of our martyrs.”
• Drug runners and/or the CIA. In this version
of events, “rogue” CIA agents in the Reagan
administration, working through Oliver
North, were attempting to free U.S. hostages
in the Middle East. The middlemen in the
operation were heroin runners from Syria
who transported drugs to the United States
through Frankfurt, Germany. According to
one “informant,” a smuggler (with the CIA’s
knowledge) would check luggage onto a plane
and an accomplice in the baggage department
would substitute an identical bag containing
narcotics. (There is no explanation for the
need for two people here, or why anyone with

Pan Am 103

access to the baggage department would not
be able to just plant the bogus bag himself.)
At any rate, Monzer al-Kassar, a Syrian drug
smuggler, who was behind the operation,
learned that a hostage rescue team had discovered the smuggling operation, and that the
team was aboard Pan Am 103. PBS’s television program Frontline claimed in January
1990 that these “intelligence officials” were a
“strong secondary target.” At that point, the
various theories reach a confluence of sorts,
with Jibril handling the actual details of the
bombing, switching a suitcase bomb for the
drug luggage.
• Yet another version involved Oliver North and
the CIA, especially as it related to another aircraft explosion, over Gander, Newfoundland,
in December 1985. In this iteration, a group
of special operations forces smuggled a small
nuclear “backpack” bomb aboard the aircraft
in Cairo, which they originally were to have
transported to Iraq to blow up the Iraqi
nuclear weapons development facility under
the guise of a nuclear accident. Supposedly,
when these soldiers understood that their mission was a suicide mission, they backed out,
but to keep them quiet, the government
ordered their Arrow Air DC-8 destroyed by a
bomb, which caused the aircraft to crash at
Gander, killing 248. The connection to Pan
Am 103 is that supposedly the same timing
device was found at each site, and in a letter
to the U.S. House Intelligence Committee in
1998, the president of the firm that made the
timers claimed that the circuit board in both
explosions was made for the CIA.
• There was no bomb at all. As in the case of
TWA 800, which exploded in 1996, one theory maintains that there was no bomb at all.
This theory suggests that there was an explosion, which has been attributed to, among
other things, a shotgun or a flare gun going
off, a structural defect in the airplane causing
the cabin door to rip free, or an electrical
fault. Like other theories, this theory hinges
on the absence of bomb fragments at the

crash site, and, as with TWA 800, this version
mostly arose from passengers in litigation who
wanted to prove negligence by the aircraft
manufacturers. In particular, rapid decompression theories emphasized the location in
both Pan Am 103 and TWA 800 of the nose
section as having fallen off before the aircraft
finally crashed, indicating an explosion separated the front section of the aircraft from the
aft. Carl A. Davies, author of Plane Truth, and
John Berry Smith, a British investigator, comparing tests of Pan Am 103, TWA 800, and
Air India 182, found no evidence of bombtype explosions that totally demolished the
section in which a bomb was located in controlled bomb tests. Other “explanations” have
included an “electromagnetic high-energy
slug” either deliberately or accidentally fired
from Alaska.
• The Mossad. A view popular with antisemites,
this version maintains that the Mossad
planted a bomb to kill Americans so as to
“discredit” Palestinian Liberation Organization chairman Yassir Arafat’s “peace initiative.” This version lacks the details of most of
the other explanations, but still manages to
place blame on President George Bush.
• The Palestinians. National Public Radio’s All
Things Considered program produced a “confession” in 1994 by Youssef Shaaban, a Palestinian who was standing trial for the killing of
a Jordanian diplomat. Many observers, however, considered his confession a desperate
attempt to gain a stay on a sure death sentence.
• In addition to possible guilty individuals or
groups, charges were also leveled at Pan Am
and/or airport security for weak security
measures in England.
Due to the fact that the incident occurred over
Scottish airspace, the trial took place under Scottish
law, but because of the international nature of the
bombing, with multiple possible locations and passengers of all nationalities, the trial was held at Camp
Zeist in the Netherlands by way of treaty agreement
573

Panama Canal

between Libya, the United Kingdom, and the United
States. In May 2000, the court under Scottish High
Court judge Lord Ranald Sutherland convened. The
following January, the court delivered a mixed verdict of guilty for Abdel Basset al-Megrahi and an
acquittal for Lameen Fhima. Al-Megrahi immediately appealed. Meanwhile, the families of the Pan
Am 103 flight had begun a long quest to sue Libya
for damages, overturning a traditional principle of
international law. Allan Gerson, a former diplomat,
took the case for the families and, partly as a result of
changes in antiterrorism legislation following the
Oklahoma City bombing, in 1996 the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act was amended to permit lawsuits
like Gerson’s to proceed. In 1998, a federal appeals
court ruled that lawsuits against Libya could proceed. Among the victims was twenty-year-old
Theodora Cohen, whose parents waged a campaign
to sue Libya, calling the attack a “ghastly act of war.”
Susan and Daniel Cohen, Theodora’s parents, who
wrote Pan Am 103, claimed that Clinton administration efforts at “normalizing” relations with Khaddafi’s
Libya had interfered with prosecution of the case
against the terrorist state.
Larry Schweikart
References
Chasey, William. 1995. Pan Am 103: The Lockerbie
Cover Up. Carson City, NV: Bridger House.
Cohen, Daniel and Susan. 2000. Pan Am 103: The
Bombing, the Betrayals, and a Bereaved Family’s
Search for Justice. New York: Diane Publishing.
Davies, Carl A. 2001. Plane Truth. New York: Algora
Publishers.
Gerson, Allan, and Jerry Adler. 2001. The Price of
Terror. New York: HarperCollins.
Leppard, David. 1991. On the Trail of Terror: The
Inside Story of the Lockerbie Investigation.
London: Jonathan Cape.
Website
The Pan Am 103 Crash Website: http://www.
geocities.com/CapitolHill/5260/headpage.html.

Panama Canal
The building of the Panama Canal linking the
Atlantic to the Pacific was mired in international
political and financial skulduggery. More recently,
574

with the transfer of U.S. control of shipping facilities at the entrances to the canal at the end of 1999,
many on the conspiratorial Right warned that a
long-standing Communist conspiracy to dominate
the strategic passage had finally come to fruition.
Early Plans to Build a Canal
The idea of building an isthmian passage linking the
Pacific and the Atlantic coasts dates back to the time
of the conquistadores, but the issue was slowly narrowed down to a rivalry between the United States
and Great Britain. In the Clayton-Bulwer treaty of
1850, both Britain and the United States pledged to
collaborate on the building of the future passage on
a nonfortification and nonexclusive basis. However,
this agreement only settled the issue on the surface.
In the following years, both governments contrived
to obtain exclusive rights from the states of Central
America, especially those which were considered
the ideal location for the future canal and vital to its
security. The United States obtained a treaty with
New Granada (later Colombia) in 1846 guaranteeing the “perfect neutrality” of the Isthmus of
Panama. The Panama railroad was completed by the
United States in 1855. Nicaragua also signed a treaty
in 1867 granting privileges, but these were not
exclusive.
The issue came back to the fore when it was
announced that the French Panama Canal Company, under Ferdinand de Lesseps, the famous
builder of the Suez Canal (1869), had undertaken to
build a canal in Panama (excavations had even
started in 1883 but were later abandoned). There
remained the diplomatic obstacle of the ClaytonBulwer treaty but it was modified in the second
Hay-Pauncefote treaty of 18 November 1901, which
gave the United States the exclusive right to build
and fortify a canal, provided its use was accorded to
all nations on equal terms (the first treaty, signed on
5 February 1900, had been rejected in March 1901).
U.S. Involvement
Once this obstacle was removed, a choice had to be
made between the Nicaragua route and the Isthmus
of Panama (a province of Colombia) route. Meanwhile the French Panama Canal Company had

Panama Canal

ceded its assets to the New Panama Canal Company
for $40 million in 1901, which lobbied actively for the
Panama route. A treaty was signed with Colombia,
the Hay-Herran treaty (22 January 1903), whereby
they granted the United States a ninety-nine-year
lease over a 6-mile-wide zone in the province of
Panama, in return for $10 million in cash and an
annual rental of $250,000 beginning nine years after
the ratification of the treaty. The U.S. Senate ratified
the treaty, but the Colombian Senate refused for
nationalistic reasons (Colombia had recently gone
through a civil war) and also because they hoped to
obtain better terms. The Colombians made a series
of miscalculations, by misjudging U.S. President
Roosevelt and Secretary of State John Hay’s commitment to the canal, and by underestimating the New
Panama Canal Company and the separatist feelings
of the inhabitants of the province, who saw their
hopes of economic prosperity thwarted by the central government of Bogota, against whom they had
often rebelled. These revolutionaries were manipulated by external forces—U.S. government and private interests—including Philippe Bunau-Varilla, a
lobbyist for the company who assured the revolutionaries of U.S. support, understanding that Roosevelt preferred that course to open land grab.
Meanwhile, invoking an obscure treaty signed
with Colombia in 1846, Bidlack’s treaty, by which the
United States was supposed to help maintain “free
and uninterrupted transit” across the isthmus, the
United States dispatched a fleet to Central America
with express orders to prevent Colombia from landing troops on the isthmus if a revolution started.
However, at the time it was signed, this treaty was
not meant to be used against Colombia, but rather to
maintain security in the area if Colombia found itself
incapable of doing so. The chronology of the revolution clearly points to active U.S. complicity and a priori knowledge of the events to come. So the revolutionaries, who sparked off their revolt on 3
November 1903, were successful because of the
presence of U.S. troops. Roosevelt’s role in this affair
was extremely important, since he recognized the
new republic within seventy-six minutes.
A 2001 book by Oviodio Diaz claims that a cabal of
Wall Street interests led by the lawyer William Nel-

son Cromwell and the banker J. P Morgan worked
behind the scenes, first to buy up the shares of the
French Panama Canal Company (for only $3.5 million), second to persuade Congress to shift the route
from Nicaragua to Panama, and then to reap the
profit when the U.S. government backed the New
Panama Canal Company. It is also alleged that in
order to succeed in making Panama the preferred
route, Cromwell helped maneuver Panama into
seceding from Colombia.
What is certain, however, is that Bunau-Varilla,
the newly appointed foreign minister of the independent Republic of Panama, negotiated a more
favorable treaty, the Hay-Bunau-Varilla treaty, two
weeks after the revolution, on 18 November 1903. It
granted to the United States in perpetuity the use of
a canal zone 10 miles wide, and transferred to the
United States government the properties of the
New Panama Canal Company and the Panama Railroad Company. In exchange, Panama was awarded
$10 million and an annuity of $250,000 for its concessions. When the canal was completed in 1904,
the canal zone had become an “unorganized possession,” with a government fixed by executive order
and run by U.S. naval officers serving as appointed
governors, while the rest of Panama was a de facto
protectorate.
International Communist Conspiracy
With the transfer of U.S. control of the port facilities
at either entrance to the canal in December 1999 to
a company called Hutchison Whampoa, right-wing
groups such as the John Birch Society warned that
what they term the International Communist Conspiracy had finally succeeded in its mission of gaining
control of such strategic routes. The argument was
that Hutchison, a Hong Kong–based company, was
in fact controlled by the Communist Chinese. The
John Birch Society and other groups warned that this
was the latest in a long series of attempts by the
Communists to gain control of the zone. These
include the long history of Communist agitation in
the region, and the attempt by Alger Hiss, the former
state department official who was convicted in the
anticommunist trials in the late 1940s and early
1950s, to interest the United Nations in taking over
575

Paranoia

the zone as a protectorate in the aftermath of World
War II.
Aïssatou Sy-Wonyu
See also: Morgan, John Pierpont
References
Diaz, Oviodio. 2001. How Wall Street Created a
Nation: J. P. Morgan, Teddy Roosevelt, and the
Panama Canal. New York: Four Walls Eight
Windows.
Ealy, Lawrence O. 1971. Yanqui Politics and the
Isthmian Passage. University Park: Pennsylvania
State University Press.
Hogan, J. Michael. 1986. The Panama Canal in
American Politics: Domestic Advocacy and the
Evolution of Policy. Carbondale: Southern Illinois
University Press.
Jasper, William F. 1999. “The Panama Canal
Giveaway.” New American, June 21. http://www.
thenewamerican.com/tna/1999/06–21–99/
vo15no13_panama.htm.
LaFeber, Walter. 1989. The Panama Canal: The
Crisis in Historical Perspective. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Major, John. 1993. Prize Possessions: The United
States and the Panama Canal 1903–1979. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Richard, Alfred Charles, Jr. 1990. The Panama
Canal in American National Consciousness. New
York: Garland Publishing.

Paranoia
The psychiatric concept of paranoia is commonly
traced to ancient Greece, where Hippocrates inaugurated it among several other mental maladies,
coining the term from the Greek para (meaning
“beside,” or “changed”) and nous (signifying “mind,”
or “reason”). Its etymology can also be traced back to
Plato’s and Aretaeus’s identifications of “religious
madness” and “divine mania,” or citations in the work
of Francois Boissier de Sauvages (Pathologie
Methodica, 1759) to transformative delusions in
which patients believed they were being transformed
into either animals or the opposite sex. It was not
until Etienne Esquirol’s Mental Maladies: A Treatise
on Insanity (1845) and, later, Emil Kraepelin’s Textbook of Psychiatry (1883–1915) that the concept of
paranoia, as it is understood today, began to take
shape. Esquirol’s descriptivist account catalogued,
576

among others, erotic, reasoning, theomaniacal, incendiary, and homicidal monomanias. Paranoia was
identified as a délire partiel (monomania), a folie
raisonante (a reasoning madness). Kraepelin’s influential definition of dementia praecox (early-onset
dementia, now classed under the broad category of
schizophrenia) most deeply informs the contemporary understanding of the concept as a delusional disorder that builds a highly organized, grandiose system that is held with great conviction. From this
tradition and that which followed, paranoia has come
to be characterized by symptoms such as projective
thinking, hostility, suspicion, centrality, delusions,
fear of the loss of autonomy, and grandiosity. Even
though paranoids are often able to achieve a high
level of occupational functioning, unlike other psychoses, there is no pharmaceutical or therapeutic
“cure” for paranoia.
The most famous case of paranoia, which has
served as the basis for most of the major contributions on the study of the subject as well as being a
remarkable autobiography of paranoia, is Daniel
Paul Schreber’s Memoirs of My Nervous Illness
(Denkwürdigkeiten eines Nervenkranken [1903]).
Schreber, a high-ranking German judge, describes
the slow and torturous process of being transformed into a woman by God in order to bring forth
a new race of men; being made into God’s sexual
slave; and being the victim of a “soul murder” at the
hands of Dr. Paul Emil Flechsig, the director of the
psychiatric hospital in which he first stayed. Sigmund Freud’s influential study of the case read
paranoia as a defense against (unconscious) homosexuality, or homosexual attack. Although this theory has largely been cast aside, it is notable for
Freud’s first theorization of projection. Freud also
argued that paranoia is a recuperative process, one
in which the paranoid attempts to rebuild his or her
world after a psychotic break through delusion.
Interestingly, “paranoia” as a discrete medicalpsychiatric definition no longer exists. The current
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) instead classifies it as an aspect of other
psychoses, such as schizophrenia.
The category of paranoia gradually moved beyond
the psychiatric domain and began to be used by

Paranoia

philosophers and social theorists to explain literary
texts, social formations, and historical epochs. The
discourse of heroic “enlightenment”—which seeks to
uncover, reveal, and disclose knowledges that are
otherwise concealed, shrouded, and hidden—is
firmly entrenched in Western philosophical traditions. The notion of “suspicion” as an interpretive
strategy can be traced from academic and Pyrrhonian skepticism through to the work of Machiavelli,
Rousseau, and Hobbes. Paul Ricouer identifies Nietzsche, Marx, and Freud as the key proponents of a
tradition that sought to redirect its Cartesian doubt
from a regard of things, to doubt consciousness itself.
In Crowds and Power (1962), Elias Canetti describes
paranoia as an “illness of power” (Canetti, 520) that
can help to explain the nature of political power in
general. Canetti establishes an equivalence between
paranoids like Schreber and despots and rulers such
as Adolph Hitler and Genghis Khan. Richard Hofstadter’s famous 1964 essay, “The Paranoid Style in
American Politics,” continues this genealogy by theorizing paranoia as a political style, rather than a
pathological category. Conducted under the banner
of “Studies on the American Right,” it charted the
paranoid style in U.S. political life since independence, through the central characteristic of persecution and its systematization in conspiracy theory.
Hofstadter sought to describe a generally right-wing
style of mind, and chose to refer to it as “paranoid”
because “no other word evokes the qualities of
heated exaggeration, suspiciousness, and conspiratorial fantasy” that characterizes this mindset (Hofstadter, 3).
The concept of paranoia has dispersed into popular culture in a vast array of forms including films
such as JFK (dir. Oliver Stone 1991) and Conspiracy
Theory (dir. Richard Donner 1997), television programs such as The X-Files and Nowhere Man, pamphlets, rants, and tracts of every political color, magazines such as Paranoia, and books such as Jim
Keith’s Secret and Suppressed: Banned Ideas and
Hidden History (1993). Rhetorics of paranoia can be
identified in popular music, from Black Sabbath’s
classic anthem “Paranoid” to Radiohead’s Paranoid
Android, and Garbage’s “I Think I’m Paranoid.” The
paranoid ethic of hypervigilance even extends to

managerial advice books such as Andrew S. Grove’s
Only the Paranoid Survive: How to Exploit Crisis
Points that Challenge Every Company and Career
(1999). The cultural sensibility expressed in these
works, one that has wholly digested Delmore
Schwartz’s adage that “even paranoids have real enemies,” suggests that there is less danger in being
paranoid than in not being paranoid enough.
Like the term “conspiracy theorist,” “paranoid”
represents a heavily loaded political and epistemological description, one that is used at certain times
as an ironic form of self-identification, and at others, as a condemnatory indictment. In a fashion
similar to the way “conspiracy theory” is used as a
description of false history, the accusation of paranoia has become a powerful tactic in the marginalization of one’s ideological opponents. Cultural critics and pop psychologists have in recent years taken
up the psychiatric history of paranoia, and (consciously or not) Freud’s contribution to it, in their
attempts to delegitimize those they consider conspiracy theorists. The conspiracy theorist (or paranoid), it is argued, takes an object or figure that was
once revered and transforms it into the focus of
persecutory anxiety, so that their conspiracy theories tell us more about the subject’s own desire and
fear than they do about anything in the world. Paranoia, so the story goes, is a disease of disaffection:
the WASP patriot, the militant feminist, and the
Islamic fundamentalist are united by their marginality, one which organizes their thinking in a paranoid or conspiratorial fashion. Other critics have
argued that such theories form appropriate responses to actual circumstances: for example, the
widespread belief in the African American community of the early 1990s that the government was
spreading drugs such as crack cocaine in poor black
communities should not be read simply as “paranoid,” but as a dramatization of very real fears of an
institutionally sponsored program of genocidal neglect, one that is based on the historical revelation of
actual conspiracies such as COINTELPRO and the
Tuskegee syphilis experiments.
Tony Elias
See also: African Americans; Cocaine; COINTELPRO.

577

Patriarchy

References
American Psychiatric Association. 1994. Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 4th
ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Association.
Canetti, Elias. [1962] 1973. Crowds and Power. Rev.
ed. Translated by Carol Stewart. Harmondsworth,
England: Penguin.
Elias, Tony. 2000. The Sublime Secret: Paranoia as a
Contemporary Literary-Cultural Logic. Ph.D.
diss., University of Melbourne.
Hofstadter, Richard. 1965. The Paranoid Style in
American Politics and Other Essays. New York:
Knopf.
Schreber, Daniel Paul. [1903] 1955. Memoirs of my
Nervous Illness. Edited and translated by Ida
MacAlpine and Richard A. Hunter. London:
Dawson.

Patriarchy
The emergence of feminism in the United States
has involved a struggle to identify and name the
problems that women face in society. In the early
days of the movement, in the middle of the nineteenth century, feminist leaders likened the condition of women to the oppression of slavery, but in
the second wave of feminism, which arose in the
middle of the twentieth century, some women
began to claim that patriarchy (the dominant rule of
men in society) amounted to a systematic conspiracy
against women. In The Feminist Mystique (1963),
Betty Friedan reported that many women, returning
to being housewives after World War II, felt emotionally and intellectually confined in their domestic
setting, and were anxious that they were failing, in
the therapeutic wisdom of the day, to adjust successfully to their roles as wives and mothers. Friedan
argued that what these housewives felt in isolation
was not the result of an individual psychological failure to adapt to the new postwar emphasis on domesticity, but a structural consequence of a whole host
of pressures placed by men and male-dominated
institutions upon women. She identified the advertising industry, education, and psychologists as particular culprits in this concerted effort to persuade
women to accept a constrained role in life, but was
careful to insist that, no matter how much this might
578

look like a conspiracy to brainwash and imprison
women, it was not necessarily the result of a deliberate plot.
Later feminist activists, however, began to take
the idea of a patriarchal conspiracy against women
more literally. With the rise of radical feminism in
the late 1960s, groups such as Cell 16 of Boston and
The Feminists of New York began to talk of conditioning, internalized oppression, and conspiracy,
employing a vocabulary of “brainwashing,” “selfsurveillance,” “infiltration,” “complicity,” and “double agency” to account for why women seemed to
conform to stereotypes of their inferiority and submissiveness. The popular film The Stepford Wives
(dir. Bryan Forbes 1975) echoed but also satirized
this idea, with its story line of a woman new to the
affluent suburbs who discovers that the local men’s
organization is quite literally plotting to turn their
wives into robotized domestic slaves. At the same
time, in the tense atmosphere of suspicion created
by the FBI’s COINTELPRO surveillance and infiltration
program, there was also discussion in the women’s
liberation movement of the possibility of an all-tooliteral conspiracy by the government to undermine
feminism in some of its more radical guises. However, other groups from this period such as WITCH
(Women’s International Terrorist Conspiracy from
Hell) and the Lavender Menace latched onto these
claims and counterclaims, deliberately (and humorously) identifying themselves as an underground
conspiracy.
In the 1970s and 1980s, the comparison of patriarchy with conspiracy began to be taken more literally, in the works of cultural feminists like Mary
Daly and Andrea Dworkin. The former, for example, asserted that “males and males only are the
originators, planners, controllers, and legitimators
of patriarchy” (Daly, 29), while the latter identified
rape as a weapon used by men in general to keep
women submissive. This picture of women as the
victims of both a society-wide, age-old conspiracy
and of a more recent, concerted backlash against
the advances of feminism became popular in the
1990s. Other feminist writers, however, insisted
that the patriarchal oppression of women was not a
conscious conspiracy but the inevitable result of the

Pearl Harbor

underlying structures of social organization that valorized male achievement and underplayed women’s
work. Identifying patriarchy as a conspiracy, even if
only metaphorically, nevertheless enabled the feminist movement to make a convincing case that what
women were suffering from was not merely personal but part of a larger political problem.
Peter Knight
See also: COINTELPRO.
References
Daly, Mary. 1978. Gyn/Ecology: The Metaethics of
Radical Feminism. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Friedan, Betty. 1963. The Feminine Mystique. New
York: Norton.
Knight, Peter. 2000. Conspiracy Culture: From the
Kennedy Assassination to The X-Files. London
and New York: Routledge.

Pearl Harbor
On Sunday, 7 December 1941, at 7:55 A.M. the
Japanese Imperial Navy launched a surprise attack
on the United States Pacific Fleet located in Pearl
Harbor, Hawaii. The theories and explanations of
the events surrounding the Japanese attack on U.S.
forces have become a cottage industry for historians
of World War II. Questions about U.S. military
involvement, and theories of how it happened and
who knew what and when, reappear with each tenth
anniversary. As early as 1942 opponents of President Roosevelt accused him of working to bring the
United States into World War II and using the Japanese attack on the United States as an excuse to do
just that.
The events surrounding the attack have been
subject to multiple interpretations. John Toland,
Robert B. Stinnett, James Rusbridger, and Eric
Nave have been among those who argued that a
conspiracy existed to use an attack on Pearl Harbor
to bring the United States into the war and was the
real reason for the Japanese success. Others led by
Gordon Prange, Roberta Wohlstetter, and Henry
Clausen have argued that it was a series of errors on
the part of the United States that gave Japan its
opportunity. Since the end of the war, large

amounts of information about who knew what have
emerged, often providing more smoke than light.
The attack caught a large number of U.S. warships in the harbor. The Japanese sank or damaged
eight battleships, two beyond repair. They also
damaged three light cruisers, three destroyers, and
four other ships beyond repair. In the U.S. Navy
and Marines, 2,086 were killed and 749 wounded,
and in the army 194 were killed and 360 wounded.
In addition, the United States lost 188 aircraft.
Japanese losses were fewer than 100 personnel and
29 aircraft. The event shocked the United States,
which had been used to the idea of security within
the territories.
The United States and Japan had become significant competitors in Asia prior to the war. U.S. policy
in the Pacific during the 1930s and early 1940s was
perceived by the Japanese as hostile to their interests in the region. At the same time, Japanese expansion in the region was seen in Washington as hostile
to U.S. interests in Asia. U.S.–Japanese relations
were deteriorating throughout 1940–1941 and as
the situation became more likely to move to a military solution, U.S. planners foresaw a potential Japanese attack on U.S. interests in the Pacific, especially
in the Philippines where the United States had a significant military presence, led by General Douglas
MacArthur. The movement of the U.S. Pacific Fleet
from San Diego to Hawaii in 1940 was done with a
purpose as well. Its placement there was a statement
of U.S. interest and intent in the region.
Hawaii was a less secure location than California.
There had already been a number of studies showing the possibility of an air attack against Pearl Harbor. The possibility was considered significant
enough that on 7 February 1941, General George
Marshall (U.S. Army chief of staff) sent Lieutenant
General Walter Short (commanding general of the
Hawaiian Department) a message informing him
that “the risk of sabotage and the risk involved in a
surprise raid by air and by submarine constitute the
real perils of the situation” (Clausen, 423). Then on
5 March 1941 another message from Marshall
informed General Short: “I would appreciate your
early review of the situation in Hawaiian Department with regard to defense from air attack. The
579

Pearl Harbor

The USS West Virginia burns in Pearl Harbor. Pearl Harbor was the worst naval disaster in U.S. history, with sixteen
ships damaged or destroyed. (National Technical Information Service)

establishment of a satisfactory system of coordinating
all means available to this is a matter of first priority”
(Clausen, 423). On 27 November 1941 the commanders in the Pacific were sent what has become
known as the “war warning” message. Marshall’s
message cautioned of potential Japanese action “at
any moment” and also informed General Short,
“Prior to hostile Japanese action, you are directed to
undertake such reconnaissance and other measures
as you deem necessary” (Clausen, 438). In the navy
message it noted the movement of an “amphibious
expedition against either the Philippines, or the Kra
Peninsula or possibly Borneo” (Clausen, 439).
The use of intelligence has been a significant
problem in clearing up the questions around the
attack. The United States had broken a number of
Japanese codes including the “Purple Code” (the
highest Japanese diplomatic code) and realized that
relations with Japan were deteriorating toward war.
580

The most famous message intercepted in the last
twenty-four hours before the attack was the “Fourteen Part Message,” which was itself of little intelligence value except that it showed the state of
U.S.–Japanese relations. More important was the
order setting the time of delivery of the Fourteen
Part Message as 1 P.M. in Washington, 7:30 A.M. in
Hawaii. General Marshall ordered that the information be communicated to the Pacific commanders
by the fastest possible method. There is a discrepancy in the number of times Marshall was alleged to
have sent officers to check on the delivery time, but
he is known to have done so at least once. Due to
atmospheric conditions the message was sent to
Pearl Harbor by telegraph and did not arrive until
after the attack on the base. There were other significant messages, including one from Hawaii to
Japan laying out the positions of U.S. ships in the
harbor. In December before the attack, the United

Pearl Harbor

States had access to information that the Japanese
diplomats had been ordered to prepare to destroy
their codes. On 6 December 1941 Colonel Bicknell,
the assistant chief of staff, announced to General
Short’s staff that “he had received information to the
effect that the Japanese counsels were burning their
papers. . . . It would at least show that something
was about to happen, somewhere” (Clausen, 445).
In spite of these successes, it needs to be remembered that the number of codes broken by the
United States was limited, as was the completeness
of the information about Japanese intentions. Thus,
preparations for war were conducted with only partial knowledge.
Another source of concern is the location of aircraft carriers. The U.S. Navy’s Pacific aircraft carriers were not present on the day of the attack. The
Saratoga was in San Diego, while the other two
U.S. carriers were off to reenforce forward bases
with aircraft. The USS Enterprise had gone to
Wake Island and was scheduled back to Pearl Harbor around 7 A.M. on 7 December, but was held up
by bad weather, and the USS Lexington was on its
way to Midway Island. The Enterprise was close
enough at the time of the attack that its aircraft
were able to make contact with Japanese aircraft.
Their missions saved them for use in the important
sea battles to come, Coral Sea and Midway.
The Theories
One theory argues that President Roosevelt knew
about the coming attack, but was willing to sacrifice
the aging battleships in order to give cause to the
American people to fight the war. In order to do this,
Roosevelt and the military command structure in
Washington not only placed the U.S. battleships in
harm’s way, they also sent U.S. aircraft carriers away
from the site of the attack to protect them. Then
Washington conspired to deny U.S. commanders in
the Pacific important intelligence data that would
have led them to assign a higher state of alert on 7
December. There is significant circumstantial evidence for this theory, based on the idea that Roosevelt needed a military disaster to enter the war.
This theory does not account for the possible impact
of an attack on other U.S. forces, or a successful

defense against a strong attack on Pearl Harbor. It
also does not account for Roosevelt’s love of the
navy, which makes his willingness to sink ships less
likely. This theory assumes that Roosevelt and the
naval leadership understood that aircraft carriers
would dominate the next naval war; the evidence for
this idea is limited. It also assumes that the intelligence clearly pointed to an attack on Pearl Harbor.
The challenge when investigating the subject is in
separating the information that is meaningful and
important from a flood of extraneous information.
As one historian notes: “we failed to anticipate Pearl
Harbor not for a want of relevant material, but
because of a plethora of irrelevant one” (Wohlstetter, 387). Without a message specifically stating an
attack on a site, an analyst must interpret the message and weigh its value based on what they know
about an adversary’s potential and preferences. It is
often easier to see a clear meaning in a message with
hindsight. Another variant of this conspiracy argues
that the British government knew about the attacks
and did not inform the United States in order to
force it into the war. It is based on the existence of
both British intercept operations, based on U.S.
efforts, and British agents in the regions. The
strength of this theory is that the British did have the
technology to break the “Purple Code,” which they
gained from the United States and from the timely
sale of British interests in Asia. This theory assumes
superior British knowledge of Japanese intentions,
for which the evidence is weak. And like Roosevelt,
Churchill loved the navy. It was unlikely he would
risk lives, or potentially the war, by allowing the U.S.
Pacific Fleet to be destroyed.
The Conspiracy’s Place in History
There were numerous official investigations of the
events around Pearl Harbor from the very beginning.
The army and navy each conducted board and individual inquiries, such as the Roberts Commission,
the Hart Inquiry, the Army Pearl Harbor Board, the
Navy Court of Inquiry, the Clarke Inquiry, the
Clausen Investigation, and the Hewitt Inquiry. In
1946 Congress conducted its own investigation and
pulled together all of the previous efforts. There has
been renewed interest in events around Pearl Harbor
581

Pentagon Papers

since its fiftieth anniversary in 1991. This has
spawned a renewal in many conspiracy theories, but
also created a growing interest in understanding the
actual events and causes of the events of 7 December
1941.
Donald E. Heidenreich, Jr.
See also: Roosevelt, Franklin Delano
References
Clausen, Henry C., and Bruce Lee. 1992. Pearl
Harbor: Final Judgment. New York: Crown.
Pearl Harbor History Associates, Inc. “Pearl Harbor
Attacked.” http://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/
index.html.
Prange, Gordon William. 1986. Pearl Harbor: The
Verdict of History. New York: McGraw-Hill Book
Co.
Rusbridger, James, and Eric Nave. 1991. Betrayal at
Pearl Harbor: How Churchill Lured Roosevelt
into World War II. New York: Summit Books.
Stinnett, Robert B. 1999. Day of Deceit: The Truth
about FDR and Pearl. New York: Free Press.
Toland, John. 1982. Infamy: Pearl Harbor and Its
Aftermath. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
U.S. Senate. 1946. Report of the Joint Committee on
the Investigation of the Pearl Harbor Attack.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Wohlstetter, Roberta. 1962. Pearl Harbor: Warning
and Decision. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.

Pentagon Papers
The Pentagon Papers was a forty-seven-volume
Pentagon study into U.S. involvement in Vietnam.
It was commissioned by the then secretary of defense, Robert McNamara, in 1967 and it provided
an in-depth analysis of events from 1945 to 1968. In
effect, it amounted to a genuine “secret history” of
the war, exactly the kind of document that conspiracy theorists have always dreamed of finding. In
June 1971, the report became an important political
issue once Daniel Ellsberg, a former hawk who had
worked for the CIA in Vietnam, leaked it to the
press. President Nixon and, especially, his national
security advisor, Henry Kissinger, were incensed by
the leak and their increased paranoia and determi582

nation to “get” Ellsberg started the descent into
Watergate.
Nixon was initially relaxed about the leak as the
first installment, printed in the New York Times on
13 June 1971, seemed to be an opportunity to embarrass his Democratic opponents. It focused upon
Lyndon Johnson’s 1964 presidential election campaign against Barry Goldwater and clearly documented Johnson’s deception over his Vietnam policy. However, within a few days the leak had turned
into a flood as the New York Times started printing
pages of top secret cables from the U.S. Embassy in
Saigon. The massive national security violation was
clearly damaging the Nixon administration and it
could have undermined Kissinger’s secret negotiations with China and North Vietnam. A number of
foreign countries were also pressing for action to
stop the flow of embarrassing reports about their
roles in the war.
The White House responded by starting an FBI
investigation and seeking a court injunction against
the Times preventing further publication. A federal
appeals court agreed to the government’s request but
the Washington Post started printing extracts instead.
A different federal appeals court refused to grant an
injunction against the Post, and other papers, including the Boston Globe and the Chicago Sun-Times,
started printing parts of the report as well. Eventually, a dozen newspapers took part while a Democratic senator, Mike Gravel, started reading the Papers
into the Congressional Record. The Nixon administration pursued the case to the Supreme Court, but
on 30 June the justices voted six to three against it.
The Court found that the government had failed to
justify prior restraints against publication and had
hence breached the First Amendment guarantees of
press freedom.
Despite the Court’s decision, the government
was still able to prosecute Daniel Ellsberg, who had
been quickly identified as the source of the leaks.
Ellsberg was then an MIT research assistant but he
had worked on CIA pacification programs in Vietnam in the 1960s. He had also worked under
Kissinger at both Harvard and in the White
House—which further inflamed the national security advisor—before joining the Rand Corporation,

Philadelphia Experiment

where he had photocopied the papers over a number of months. Kissinger and Nixon became determined to discredit Ellsberg, whose denunciations of
them and the war in Vietnam were making him into
a peace movement hero. A cheering crowd greeted
him when he turned himself in to federal authorities in Boston on 28 June.
A grand jury had already been impaneled to
investigate the leaking but the White House prevented full cooperation in order to cover up its previous misdeeds. Ellsberg’s lawyers were told that the
government had no wiretap records involving their
client but he had been taped fifteen times on one of
the secret “Kissinger taps.” These taps were not run
through the usual FBI channels and revealing the
records of Ellsberg would have divulged the whole
secret (and illegal) operation.
Nixon also wanted to connect Ellsberg to a Communist country as this would not only discredit him
but would also increase his maximum possible jail
sentence. No such link could be found, however,
and Nixon was convinced that this was because the
FBI wasn’t performing a thorough investigation.
(Ellberg’s father-in-law was an old friend of J. Edgar
Hoover.) He therefore ordered a White House
investigation that was started by E. Howard Hunt,
an ex-CIA man. Nixon also wanted action to prevent
further leaks, so a new White House unit, which
became known as the Plumbers, was formed involving David Young, Egil Krogh, G. Gordon Liddy, and
Hunt.
The unit soon decided that a CIA psychological
profile of Ellsberg would greatly help to discredit
him. Ellsberg’s psychiatrist had already refused to
give his files to the FBI and when the CIA drew up
a profile using the Plumbers’ material it was very
short and superficial. The Plumbers, with the
approval of the president’s chief domestic advisor,
John Ehrlichman, therefore decided to perform a
covert operation to retrieve the files. Liddy and Hunt
organized it but, despite their men wrecking the psychiatrist’s office, nothing was found. No further such
operations were carried out, but the Plumbers continued to dream up schemes to discredit Ellsberg,
including drugging him with LSD. They also persisted in pursuing the CIA profile and were eventu-

ally rewarded with an eight-page analysis blaming
Ellsberg’s actions upon aggression against his father,
the president, and Ellsberg’s psychiatrist.
The CIA profile probably wasn’t used for anything, but the White House did use other material
on Ellsberg. An article drawing together the leftwing causes his lawyer had supported was leaked to
the press by Nixon’s “hatchet man,” Charles Colson,
who later served seven months in jail after pleading
guilty to infringing on Ellsberg’s right to a fair trial.
Ellsberg, however, avoided a prison sentence as his
trial collapsed in May 1972 in the midst of Watergate. During the trial, Judge Matthew Byrne had
been made aware of the “Kissinger taps” and the
Plumbers’ break-in, as well as being publicly offered
the post of director of the FBI. The cumulative
effect of this government misconduct, he said,
offended a sense of justice and, instead of ordering
a retrial, he dismissed all of the charges against Ellsberg and his codefendant, Anthony Russo of the
Times. Coming just after the resignation of Nixon’s
chief aides, H. R. Haldeman and Ehrlichman, the
trial’s collapse added to the air of crisis and corruption engulfing the White House.
Neil Denslow
See also: Hoover, J. Edgar; Kissinger, Henry; Liddy,
G. Gordon; Nixon, Richard; Watergate.
References
Emery, Fred. 1994. Watergate: The Corruption and
Fall of Richard Nixon. London: Pimlico.
Kutler, Stanley. 1990. The Wars of Watergate: The
Last Crisis of Richard Nixon. New York: Knopf.
Sheehan, Neil, et al. 1971. The Pentagon Papers.
New York: Bantam Books.

Philadelphia Experiment
If it happened, the Philadelphia Experiment would
represent the greatest government cover-up of
World War II, with scientific importance rivaling
that of the Manhattan Project but surrounded by
even greater secrecy. Had the story appeared during
the war, it might have seemed too fantastic to
believe. But a decade later, the hydrogen bomb was
a reality, UFOs had become a staple of U.S. popular
583

Philadelphia Experiment

culture, and people were more willing than ever to
accept the fantastic. Beginning in late 1955, a drifter
named Carl Allen (alias Carlos Allende) wrote three
letters to astronomer Morris Jessup, whose book
The Case for the UFO had recently been published.
In these letters, Allen claimed that during World
War II he was a merchant seaman on the USS
Andrew Furuseth and an eyewitness to U.S. Navy
invisibility experiments involving a destroyer escort,
the USS Eldridge. According to Allen, Albert Einstein’s unified field theory was tested on the
Eldridge in October 1943, causing the ship to vanish
from its berth at the Philadelphia Navy Yard, appear
briefly hundreds of miles away in Norfolk, Virginia,
and then reappear in Philadelphia. Caught in a highenergy force field, the ship’s crew was said by Allen
to have suffered a variety of ill effects, with some
burned, others driven insane, and a number who
disappeared forever. Jessup later learned that in
1955, a curiously annotated copy of his book had
been sent anonymously to the navy’s Office of Naval
Research. Although the annotations were written as
if by three nonhuman entities, Jessup suspected that
they were the work of Allen. After Jessup died (an
apparent suicide) in 1959, other writers on UFOs
began to incorporate references to the Philadelphia
Experiment into their books, and its notoriety grew
over time.
William Moore and Charles Berlitz took Allen’s
story seriously after establishing that he had been a
seaman on the Andrew Furuseth in 1943 and 1944.
Despite the fact that they could not locate logs for
either ship, they deduced that the Andrew Furuseth
and the Eldridge could have been in the same vicinity in August 1943 and that the Eldridge might have
been involved in magnetic invisibility research that
was carried out during the war to make warships less
vulnerable to enemy mines. One of their sources,
given the pseudonym “Dr. Rinehart,” claimed to
have been one of the scientists who conducted the
research in its earlier stages, and they also found that
Albert Einstein was working as a navy scientific consultant in 1943. As further corroboration, Moore
and Berlitz cited the experiences of two airmen who
claimed to have been told about the experiment by
an unidentified survivor of the episode during a
584

chance encounter in 1970, and the story of a UFO
witness who said he was told by U.S. and Canadian
officials in 1975 that both governments had known
about the existence of aliens since a 1943 navy invisibility experiment. In the end, however, Moore and
Berlitz confessed their inability to provide proof
without access to secret government files.
The Problem of Fact Versus Fiction
A popular film, The Philadelphia Experiment
(1984), added the element of time travel to the original story, with two sailors from the Eldridge being
transported across forty-one years to the Nevada site
of a top secret missile-defense project. Although the
element of time travel was fictional, it was not long
afterwards that an individual came forward claiming
to be an Eldridge crewman with a newly restored
memory of time travel even more elaborate than
that shown in the film. The story of the Philadelphia
Experiment grew over the years to include alien
contact, mind control, and mysticism, and a series of
books (beginning with Nichols and Moon in 1992)
linked the original experiment to covert government
research allegedly conducted at an abandoned air
force base in Montauk, New York. This forging of
links is reminiscent of the “mystery merging” that
UFO researcher Jacques Vallée imputed to UFO
research in 1991, in which mysteries are linked
together and thus made more compelling despite
their actual lack of connection.
Moore and Berlitz identified three possible
explanations for Allen’s story of the Philadelphia
Experiment: a fraud, a true account of a real event,
or an exaggerated and distorted account of a real
event. The problem with the last two alternatives is
that no independent evidence has surfaced to show
that any radar or magnetic invisibility experiment
was performed on the Eldridge during the war, or
even that the ship was ever in Philadelphia. Sources
whose testimony allegedly corroborate Allen’s story
have almost invariably been anonymous or unidentified, or hidden behind a pseudonym as in the case
of “Dr. Rinehart.” Allen reportedly confessed that
his story was a hoax, but later repudiated the confession. In 1967 and 1968, he wrote to Jacques Vallée, whose book Anatomy of a Phenomenon had just

Pierce, William L.

appeared in paperback. Along with an offer to sell
certain documents, Allen repeated his tale of the
Philadelphia Experiment and added a new story of
a ship that survived the explosion of a UFO in 1947,
leading Vallée to conclude that he was dealing with
a con man. A few years later, Allen is reported to
have written to his parents and boasted of having
written the annotations to Jessup’s book. Considering the lack of corroborative evidence, and the
dubious nature of the evidence in favor of it, the
Philadelphia Experiment appears to deserve the
treatment given it in a navy form letter, which states
that the Office of Naval Research never conducted
invisibility experiments nor would they be possible
outside the realm of science fiction.
Larry Haapanen
See also: Area 51; UFOs.
References
Moore, William, and Charles Berlitz. 1979. The
Philadelphia Experiment: Project Invisibility.
New York: Grosset & Dunlap.
Nichols, Preston, and Peter Moon. 1992. The
Montauk Project: Experiments in Time. Westbury,
NY: Sky Books.
Vallée, Jacques. 1991. Revelations: Alien Contact
and Human Deception. New York: Ballantine
Books.
Website
Parascope: http://www.parascope.com/en/articles.
allende.htm.

Pierce, William L.
An arch racial conspiracy theorist as well as a white
supremacist leader and publisher, William Pierce is
most widely known for his novel The Turner Diaries.
The novel, like most of Pierce’s writings, depicts a
racial revolution to overcome a national, multicultural conspiracy against Anglo-Saxon Americans in
the late twentieth century. The Turner Diaries generally had an underground existence as a magazine
serial among many white supremacist movements
until its publication as a book in 1978, when the Federal Bureau of Investigation denounced it as the most
dangerous book in the United States. Pierce’s pseudonymous novel became notorious, however, when
Timothy McVeigh bombed the Oklahoma City Mur-

rah Federal Building in April 1995, killing 168 people
in an enactment of one of the novel’s key scenes. An
excerpt from The Turner Diaries was found with
McVeigh at the time of his arrest and has since propelled Pierce’s name as well as his organization,
National Alliance, into the mainstream media. Pierce
justifies his extremist writings with a conspiracy theorist’s fear of ethnic diversity; in his writing, the liberal
conspiracy to pollute the United States with multiculturalism represents the end of the white race.
Ironically, Pierce’s work depicts and even exhorts a
conspiracy of its own: the targeting and killing of
those who represent or support racial diversity in the
United States. While his fiction depicts the political
strife of war in an imagined social transition from a
multicultural to a white United States, Pierce also
expresses his extremist politics through other political
modes such as Libertarian and militia ideologies.
Pierce’s incendiary rhetoric has been effective with
some of his readers; The Turner Diaries is known to
have inspired other crimes. In the early 1980s, a
group named for The Turner Diaries’ highest echelon
of resistance fighters (the Order) committed murder,
robbery, and counterfeiting, and bombed a synagogue in Colorado. In the early 1990s, a group calling
itself the Aryan Republican Army committed bank
robberies and bombings across the Midwest. Later in
the 1990s, members of the New Order in St. Louis
were arrested for plotting to bomb the AntiDefamation League’s New York headquarters, the
Southern Poverty Law Center in Alabama, and the
Simon Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles. Although
Pierce denies the influence of The Turner Diaries or
any other of his many publications and broadcasts in
inspiring violent acts, he has a history of generating
conspiracy rhetoric that exhorts those who would
seek a white United States to take action.
Pierce has been active in right-wing extremist
movements since the 1960s. Born in Atlanta, Georgia, 11 September 1933, he holds a B.Sc. from Rice
University (1955), and an M.A. (1958) and a Ph.D.
(1962) in physics from the University of Colorado.
Pierce was an assistant professor of physics at Oregon State University from 1962 to 1965. He then became a senior research scientist at the Advanced
Materials Research Development Laboratory of
585

Pierce, William L.

United Aircraft’s Pratt and Whitney Division in
1965–1966. During this time he was involved with
the John Birch Society. By 1966, Pierce left his employment and the John Birch Society for full-time
neo-Nazi activism with the American Nazi Party,
run by George Lincoln Rockwell. There, he edited
the National Socialist World, a quarterly journal for
academics and intellectuals. When Rockwell was
assassinated in 1967, Pierce became one of the leaders of the National Socialist White People’s Party,
which succeeded the American Nazi Party. By 1970,
Pierce left the National Socialist White People’s
Party to join the National Youth Alliance, a far-right
political group whose aim was to disrupt liberal
causes on college campuses. Infighting between
Pierce and the Nazi Youth Party’s founder, Willis
Carto, split the group into factions. Pierce’s wing
came to be known as the National Alliance, a group
he has run since 1974.
Pierce relocated the National Alliance from
Arlington, Virginia, to a 346-acre farm in Mill Point,
West Virginia. In many ways, Pierce is the National
Alliance; he runs all aspects of the organization and
writes most of and entirely oversees all its media.
Pierce edits and writes for its magazine, National
Vanguard (originally Attack!), and an internal
newsletter, National Alliance Bulletin (formerly titled
Action), as well as Resistance magazine. He also oversees several businesses as part of the National
Alliance: National Vanguard Books, Resistance Records, and Cymaphane Records. Additionally, Pierce
broadcasts a weekly radio program, American Dissident Voices on AM/FM and shortwave radio and
writes articles for Free Speech, the program’s
newsletter.
The National Alliance aims to become the world’s
largest umbrella organization for white supremacy
and is well on its way to meeting that goal. Domestically, Pierce created affiliations with the antigovernment Patriot movement during its rise in the 1990s.
A decade later, he reached out to neo-Nazi youth
groups, once again, through his record labels. With
chapters in twenty-three states and a web page that
is translatable into eight languages, the National
Alliance has become well established. The use of
technology has driven Pierce’s outreach efforts and
586

allows for unique associations: in 2002, a large
excerpt from one of his radio speeches, downloaded
to a National Alliance listserv, ended up on a Hezbollah website two weeks later. The National Alliance
provides a range of literature, radio, and music targeting both general and specific audiences that disseminate white supremacist conspiracy theories.
Specifically, Pierce’s work describes a national
crisis for white racial purism—a conspiracy of multiculturalism—and urges political activism and the
recruitment of new members to build a political
movement. However, National Alliance’s ideology
frequently describes force as the means to this
reclamation of a white ancestry and a commitment
to building a white nation. Pierce’s fiction, written
under the name Andrew Macdonald, depicts conspiracy theorists reacting to a perceived conspiracy
of racial treason. Largely critical of Jewish media
and business in the United States, these novels also
focus on miscegenation and other racial “pollution”
of the Anglo-Saxon bloodline. In these imagined
scenarios, race patriots intend to provoke a racial
war that will allow for armed rebellion and the creation of a white nation.
In The Turner Diaries, the United States is represented as severely intolerant of a specific “racism”—
defined as acts perpetrated by whites against people
of color—and has created a climate in which white
people are under scrutiny for racist transgressions
while people of color exploit the situation. The
seemingly liberal government extends its oppressive
influence with a law that repeals the Second
Amendment right to own firearms. The consequent
insurrection—which eventually becomes a global
race war—is chronicled by one of its unassuming
heroes, Earl Turner, whose fellow patriotic, militant
white supremacists have prepared to fight “the System’s” despotism. Turner’s diary describes his experiences as he organizes small resistance cells and
goes about the daily labor of domestic terrorism in
the conspiracy to overthrow the government. Some
of the novel’s major scenes include a mortar attack
on Washington, D.C., and a truck bombing of FBI
headquarters (which McVeigh borrowed for his terrorism in Oklahoma City). One of the most graphic
scenes is “the Day of the Rope,” in which the group

Pontiac, Chief

publicly hangs tens of thousands of race traitors with
placards describing their treason. Turner’s heroic
acts lead to his induction into the group’s inner circle (the Order)—a transcendence that concludes
with Turner’s suicide mission and subsequent martyrdom as the group’s savior. By the novel’s end, the
New Era of white dominance has overcome the
racial conspiracy.
Pierce’s second novel, Hunter, published in 1989,
reaches out to a different readership, moving away
from the working-class emphasis of The Turner
Diaries and focusing on a highly educated audience.
The conspiracy of multiculturalism is the same, but
the focus is the Jewish-owned media’s social role.
Protagonist Oscar Yeager is a talented engineer who,
although highly educated and extremely rational, is
being uncharacteristically reactionary—literally
hunting black and white “miscegenating” couples in
his disgust about the decline of the race. Unlike
Turner, however, Yeager seeks a deeper, intellectual
contextualization of his white supremacism as well
as a solution that speaks to the social ambiguities he
perceives. Hunter chronicles Yeager’s hunt for a philosophy, his subsequent education about the Jewish
media conspiracy, and his own answer to the racial
conspiracy of a multicultural United States. In the
novel’s solution, Yeager becomes a media mogul
who educates the U.S. public about white supremacism with a fundamentalist television preacher and
deposes the Jewish media monopoly by gaining the
largest market share of the viewing audience. The
novel depicts Yeager’s media counterconspiracy as a
success both in reaching white America and beginning the transition to a racially pure nation with less
large-scale bloodshed but, rather, key behind-thescene assassinations at high levels.
In addition to his two novels, Pierce published
Serpent’s Walk, another racial conspiracy text, in
1991, under the name Randolph D. Calverhall, and
has two other books published with National Vanguard Books: The Best of Attack! and National Vanguard Tabloid (1984) and Gun Control in Germany,
1928–1945 (1994). Pierce’s organization has
reached out to other spheres of influence: from the
purchase of AT&T stock in order to use the shareholder meetings as a platform for antisemitic

speech, to the targeting of youth markets in his
newest ventures. The most diverse products in his
catalog include the 1993 comic title, New World
Order Comix #1, The Saga of . . . White Will! and a
computer game depicting a virtual race war: “Ethnic Cleansing: The Game!” In 1999, Pierce became
involved in the music industry through white power
music labels Resistance and Cymophane Records.
Pierce finds conspiracy everywhere he looks:
organizations working against hate-speech have targeted Pierce’s various businesses and have worked
to discredit his tax-exempt status (through his
Church of the Creator organization) as well as to
direct attention toward his enterprise. In 1996, the
Southern Poverty Law Center won an $85,000
judgment against Pierce for his role in an effort to
keep Church of the Creator assets from the family
of a murdered member, Harold Mansfield. Pierce
continues to refer to these groups as part of the conspiracy against white values and white supremacism, just as he continues to find ways to bring his
extremist politics to mainstream media.
Ingrid Walker Fields
See also: Antisemitism; Neo-Nazis; Oklahoma City
Bombing.
References
Griffin, Robert S. 2001. The Fame of a Dead Man’s
Deeds: An Up-Close Portrait of White Nationalist
William Pierce. Bloomington, IN: 1st Books
Library.
New York Times. 5 July 1995, A10; 20 April 1996, 8;
26 September 2001, B6.
Southern Poverty Law Center. Intelligence Report.
Issue 91.
Websites
Anti-Defamation League: http://www.adl.org/learn/
Ext_US/Pierce.asp.
National Alliance: http://www.natall.com.
One Peoples Project: http://www.onepeoplesproject.
com./
Southern Poverty Law Center: http://www.
splcenter.org/.

Pontiac, Chief
A war leader of the Odawa tribe, Pontiac (often
called Chief Pontiac) was identified by many contemporary British colonial officials as the chief
587

Pontiac, Chief

instigator of a devastating succession of military
attacks against Anglo-American forts and settlements throughout the Great Lakes region during
the summer of 1763. As rumor and speculation
grew, the British feared that his actions were part of
a wider French conspiracy, but it is more likely that
Pontiac was pursuing his own plot.
His reputation as the architect of one of the most
substantial Native American military actions in
North American history was cemented by the prolific U.S. historian Francis Parkman. In his History
of the Conspiracy of Pontiac (1851), Parkman credited Pontiac’s intellect and bravery in executing the
plot, but characterized his actions as a doomed
effort on the part of “savages” to stave off the
inevitable advance of Anglo-Saxon civilization across
the continent. While subsequent historians have disputed the extent of Pontiac’s political influence and
military organizing beyond his home settlement
near Detroit, he was undoubtedly the principal catalyst for a Native American resistance movement
unprecedented in both its geographic scope and its
ultimate diplomatic success.
An active partisan on behalf of the French during
the Seven Years’ War (1756–1763), Pontiac remained
loyal to his allies after the conquest of Canada by
Great Britain on 8 September 1760. Many of his subsequent activities were devoted to trying to bring
about a return to the relationship his people experienced with the French civil and military officials.
Following the takeover of former French forts in the
Great Lakes and Ohio Valley by British Army troops
(1760–1761), many of the local Native American
nations grew aggrieved by the parsimony of British
officials in diplomatic negotiations, as well as by the
failure of the British to fulfill an earlier promise to
ban settlement west of the Appalachian mountains.
Pontiac worked to meld this growing anti-English
sentiment among the region’s native peoples with
nativist messages of spiritual revival emanating from
Delaware villages in the Ohio country. Pontiac also
collaborated with the local French population at
Detroit, some of whom promoted the notion of the
defeated French king sending an army up the Mississippi River to join with the natives against the
British. Jittery British traders and officers, upon
588

hearing this news, proved all too ready to believe that
the ensuing war was the product of a French conspiracy, but in fact Pontiac and his followers fought
for their own ends.
Pontiac commenced his siege of the key British
fort at Detroit on 9 May 1763. Within a month, he
had nearly 1,000 Odawa, Ojibwa, Potawatomi, and
Huron warriors fighting with him. Pontiac followed
up his initial attack by sending wampum belts with
encoded messages encouraging similar attacks
against other British posts. For this reason, he has
been characterized as the orchestrator of the entire
conflict. Yet while other native nations followed Pontiac’s lead, a lack of unity in timing and an emphasis
on local tribal objectives proved the rule for the duration of the war. This did not, however, compromise
the overall impact of Native American military
actions. Their well-conceived ruses, gunfire from
entrenched positions, and flaming arrows had, by the
end of June 1763, destroyed or forced the abandonment of nine British-occupied forts between western
Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. The troops at Detroit
held out until reinforcements arrived on 3 October
1763. On 30 October 1763 Pontiac learned that his
appeals for assistance from French troops still posted
in Illinois had been categorically rejected, and he
raised his siege.
Hostilities in Pontiac’s War continued intermittently for the next two years, and during that time
Pontiac visited Native American communities
throughout modern Ohio, Michigan, Indiana, and
Illinois, urging continued resistance to the British
regime. With most of the interior forts razed, Native
American warriors turned their attention to frontier
settlements. Ultimately, historians have estimated
that native attacks in Pontiac’s War accounted for
the deaths of 2,000 Anglo-American settlers and 400
British soldiers.
As Pontiac’s notoriety grew, he came to be seen
by the British authorities as crucial to prospects for
ending the conflict. Despite the success of two military expeditions sent to the Great Lakes region
over the summer of 1764 in securing the submission of many of the principal combatants, Pontiac
remained elusive. Fearing that the war would continue unless he was dead or conciliated, the British

Populism

pursued him relentlessly. In talks with British negotiators at Fort Ouiatanon (near modern Lafayette,
Indiana) in July 1765, Pontiac agreed to preliminary
terms of peace. Pontiac’s principal demand that the
British make clear purchases of land in the Great
Lakes region in advance of any settlement was
endorsed in the July 1766 Treaty of Oswego, which
ended Pontiac’s War.
After fighting the British to a military stalemate
and securing a key diplomatic victory for his native
allies, Pontiac attempted to live a peaceful life of
hunting. Yet his reputation attracted attention and
fear, and he was murdered under suspicious circumstances by a Peoria Indian in the Illinois village
of Cahokia on 20 April 1769.
Jon Parmenter
See also: Native Americans.
References
Dowd, Gregory E. 1990. “The French King Wakes
up in Detroit: ‘Pontiac’s War’ in Rumor and
History.” Ethnohistory 37: 254–278.
McConnell, Michael N. 1992. A Country Between:
The Upper Ohio Valley and Its Peoples,
1724–1774. Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press.
Parkman, Francis. 1851. History of the Conspiracy
of Pontiac and the War of the North American
Tribes against the English Colonies after the
Conquest of Canada. Boston, MA: Little, Brown,
and Company.
Parmenter, Jon William. 1997. “Pontiac’s War:
Forging New Links in the Anglo-Iroquois
Covenant Chain Alliance, 1758–1766.”
Ethnohistory 44: 617–654.
White, Richard. 1991. The Middle Ground: Indians,
Empires, and Republics in the Great Lakes
Region, 1650–1815. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press.

Populism
The agrarian movement in the West, South, and
mountain regions of the United States in the late
nineteenth century, known as Populism, contained
several elements of conspiracy thinking directed at
New York City, politicians, and the railroads.
Although mainstream Populists did not generally
embrace the notion of a “New York money power,”

many nevertheless were convinced that powerful
forces had united to oppress farmers, miners, and
industrial workers. This sentiment was epitomized
in the 1896 speech at the Democratic convention in
which William Jennings Bryan, the party’s nominee
for president, warned that these forces “will not
crucify mankind on a cross of gold.”
Following the Civil War, a general price deflation
set in that especially hurt farmers who had long-term
(five- to fifteen-year) mortgages by making the dollars they repaid much more valuable than the dollars
they borrowed. At the same time, new silver discoveries in the West unleashed a torrent of silver onto
the market. Advocates for farmers and debtors saw a
way to combine the blessings of silver and the plight
of the farmers by monetizing silver at a fixed rate of
16:1 (or sixteen silver ounces for one ounce of gold).
In fact, the market rate was closer to 17:1, but the
“silverites” hoped to force the government to purchase the silver at inflated prices, thus putting more
money into the economy, especially in the West.
At the same time, agrarians became concerned
about the level of prosperity in railroads and banking
while agriculture—the backbone of the Republic
since Jefferson’s time—languished. As the historian
of the Populist movement, John D. Hicks, noted, the
farmer believed that he “worked longer hours, under
more adverse conditions, and with smaller compensation for his labor than any other man on earth.”
(Hicks, 55). Farmers also felt exploited by the railroads and grain elevators, which they deemed to
have a “monopoly” over local shipping and storage.
In truth, few rural areas in states such as Kansas
lacked access to at least two railroads, but the inconvenience of hauling grain to sites farther away was
deemed unprofitable by many farmers.
Complaints about the railroads were preeminent
within the young Populist Party. The party originated
with various farmers’ organizations, such as the
National Farmers’ Alliance and the National Farmers’ Alliance and Industrial Union, as well as local
antimonopoly parties, such as the People’s Antimonopoly Party in Minnesota, the National Greenback Party, and the local Grange organizations. Various groups met in 1889, and the national convention
of the “People’s Party of the U.S.A.,” known as the
589

Populism

“Populists,” met in May 1891 to draw up a platform
and nominate a candidate. Key leaders of the agrarian movement were present, including Ignatius Donnelly of Minnesota, “Sockless Jerry” Simpson of
Kansas, Tom Watson of Georgia, and James Weaver
of Iowa. The convention nominated Weaver to run
on a platform that demanded “free and unlimited
coinage of silver at 16:1,” an income tax, and restrictions on immigrants. Although the platform did not
specify government ownership of the railroads,
mainstream Populists all agreed on that measure as
well, but most agreed it was not likely in the near
future, and they therefore settled for government
regulation of the railroads.
Weaver, of course, had no impact on the 1892
election. Congress had already passed the Sherman
Silver Purchase Act, which was a half-measure in
which the government planned to purchase large
amounts of silver—not at 16:1, but at 161/2:1. This
created a window for arbitrage among speculators,
resulting in a massive outflow of gold from the
United States Treasury and major banks and triggering the panic of 1893. Although Congress
repealed the act that year, the damage had been
done and the erosion of the gold reserve undermined the nation’s banking system.
The panic gave the Republicans a campaign
issue—the gold standard—and the Democrats took
the bait by nominating William Jennings Bryan, a
Democrat with strong populist leanings, as their
presidential standard bearer. Bryan’s positions so
closely paralleled those of the Populist Party that it
did not nominate its own candidate, but supported
Bryan. At the convention, Bryan delivered his
famous speech in which he railed at those who
would impose the gold standard and “crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.” (Bryan, the Populists,
and the entire silver issue all became an allegory
that emerged as one of the most famous children’s
books and then films of all time, L. Frank Baum’s
The Wonderful Wizard of Oz.) The Populists did
gain control of some legislatures and judgeships,
passing a law in Nebraska that imposed a cut in railroad freight rates.
But railroad and elevator freight rates had taken
a backseat to the silver issue. Moreover, as reform
590

elements within the Republican Party gained
momentum, the Populists lost ground. Unable to
win at the ballot box with any regularity, they faced
either fusion into the Democratic Party or allying
themselves with the hated Republicans, who were
actually enacting reforms. And despite the original
lofty goals of a party that had no discrimination
between races, the southern Populists had much
different attitudes than those in the Midwest.
The Populists embodied the late-nineteenthcentury agrarian anxiety about the declining status
of the farmer in U.S. society. Farmers had gone into
the Civil War era as a majority, and had controlled
the electoral college through the votes of the South,
West, and Midwest—all essentially hinging on the
power of the farm bloc. But after the Civil War, the
United States shifted to a manufacturing society,
and farm states lost their electoral clout. While literature and culture still held the farmer in high
esteem, neither his income nor his political power
seemed to confirm that status. This produced an
anxiety noted by Richard Hofstadter in his Age of
Reform (1955), where, despite the fact that falling
prices across the board actually made most farmers
better off, they in general perceived they were losing ground in the economy.
Along with railroads, banks increasingly became
targets for agrarian attacks. The unwillingness to
permit branch banking ensured that in the Midwest
especially, small country banks relied ever more
heavily on big-city banks, particularly those in New
York City. This, in turn, magnified conspiracy theories involving a “money trust” or “Jewish bankers”
who controlled the nation’s finances. Publications
such as William “Coin” Harvey’s Coin’s Financial
School (1894) contributed to such views. Like other
third parties in U.S. history, however, the Populists
melted into one or the other of the two established
parties, and had largely disappeared by 1900 . . .
except in the fictional account of Frank Baum.
Larry Schweikart
See also: Donnelly, Ignatius; Gold Standard.
References
Harvey, William H. [1894] 1963. Coin’s Financial
School. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Posse Comitatus

Hicks, John D. 1961. The Populist Revolt: A History
of the Farmers’ Alliance and the People’s Party.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Hofstadter, Richard D. 1955. The Age of Reform
from Bryan to FDR. New York: Knopf.
Pollack, Norman, ed. 1967. The Populist Mind.
Indianapolis, IN, and New York: The BobbsMerrill Company.

Posse Comitatus
In the 1980s, the Posse Comitatus spread its conspiracy-minded antigovernment and antisemitic
message in the name of white, Christian, males to
counter what they saw as attacks on their rights.
Concentrated in eighteen states, arching from the
Southwest, up the Pacific Coast through the Rocky
Mountain region, and into the Midwest, the organization sought to decentralize all government above
the county level. Their message resonated strongly
in economically stressed rural areas of the United
States and their rhetoric and ideology continued
to instruct Christian Patriots into the twenty-first
century.
The current Posse movement started in the late
1960s. William Porter Gale helped organize the
Posse Comitatus—Latin for “power to the county”—
on the principle of local governmental authority at
the county level and elimination of federal authority.
Gale argued that the local sheriff constituted the
supreme law of the county and should be the only
recognized law. Henry Lamont “Mike” Beach of
Portland, Oregon, another early Posse provocateur,
echoed Gale’s message and helped the movement
spread throughout the West, from Mariposa County,
California, to Bonner County, Idaho. By 1976, the
Federal Bureau of Investigation estimated the movement to have between 12,000 and 50,000 members.
For the Posse Comitatus, political evil manifested itself in three areas: corruption of the nation’s
government, perversion of the financial system, and
degradation of Christian beliefs. First, democracy
had usurped the founding framers’ republican form
of government in the United States. Believers
argued that the rabble now ruled governmental
decisions, robbing “Freemen characters” of their
God-given rights. Accordingly, the Posse attempted

to restore vested power of government into local
hands with the blessing of the supreme law of the
land, the Constitution.
Two actions, according to the Posse, corrupted
the national government and granted it unlawful
supreme power. First, the Fourteenth Amendment
to the Constitution allegedly created an entirely
new class of citizens to join those so-called Freemen characters who had always had rights. Racial
and cultural minorities, as well as women of all ethnicities, had now gained rights from the government as “federal citizens,” unlike “Freemen” who
had received their rights from God. The Fourteenth Amendment, they thought, had thus undermined the original intent of the Constitution.
The second setback had supposedly come with the
expansion of government during the presidency of
Franklin D. Roosevelt. The Roosevelt administration, Posse conspiracists said, attempted to end the
distinction between “federal citizens” and “Freemen” by eliminating the natural rights of the
“Freemen.” In order to induce “Freemen characters” to give up their God-given rights, the governmental cabal plotted methods for citizens to unknowingly sign away their rights by applying for a hunting
license, social security, or even a bank account. Participation in these government programs, according
to Posse ideology, must remain voluntary, with only
the local sheriff enforcing the law on white Christian
men.
The Posse also developed strong ties to the Christian Identity movement. Followers of Christian
Identity believe that they are the true Israelites, the
chosen of God. The Anglo-Saxon, Scandinavian,
Germanic, and other northern Europeans reportedly migrated to their homeland from Israel. Some
later moved to the true holy land, the United States.
Conversely, the movement stated, Jews sought to
help Satan destroy earthly civilization. Therefore,
according to the movement, to maintain civilization,
whites must band together to drive out the evil
forces of Satan consisting of the Jews, minorities,
and nonbelievers. The Jewish faith has purportedly
undermined white citizens’ rights by producing the
Federal Reserve banking system and the Internal
Revenue Service.
591

Pound, Ezra

By 1974, the Posse’s rhetoric extended from the
West Coast into the Midwest, where a local Wisconsin Posse kidnapped an Internal Revenue Service agent, held him for several hours, and assaulted
him. The following year, an Illinois Posse member
earned a contempt charge during a divorce hearing
for refusing to acknowledge the court. In San
Joaquin County, California, the Posse attempted to
prevent organizers from the United Farm Workers
from speaking to laborers. Richard Butler, later of
the Aryan Nations, and his Posse tried to arrest a
Coeur d’Alene, Idaho, police officer who was testifying in court on an assault charge against a Posse
member. In Stanfield, Oregon, a Posse armed with
dogs and guns attempted to appropriate a large
wheat and potato farm to settle a land dispute.
From its singular inception, the Posse Comitatus’s membership remained steadfast in the desire
to secede from the existing national government,
separate from society, and restore the authority of
the local sheriff. According to one Posse pamphlet:
The unlawful use of County Sheriffs as LACKEYS
of the Courts should be discontinued at once. There
is no lawfull [sic] authority, for Judges and the
Courts to direct the law enforcement activities of a
County Sheriff. The Sheriff is accountable and
responsible only to the citizens who are the
inhabitants of his County.

The literature of the Posse Comitatus exhorted
fellow “Patriots” to do their duty against those who
“destroy our freedoms and mak[e] us serfs of a
ONE-WORLD GOVERNMENT, ruled by the
ANTI-CHRIST.”
In the late 1970s, the Posse Comitatus movement tapped rural America for membership.
Between 1983 and 1990 at least 500,000 people had
their farms foreclosed each year. The economic
hardship provided an opportunity to recruit from an
audience disenchanted with the current system.
In the mid-1980s, Posse members reacted to the
increasing surveillance by the government. In February 1983, Gordon Kahl resisted receipt of a warrant for outstanding taxes and shot two federal
agents outside Medina, North Dakota. While Kahl
592

escaped the initial gunfight, authorities killed him
when he resisted arrest after a nationwide manhunt. Twenty months later, Arthur Kirk engaged the
highway patrol SWAT team outside Grand Island,
Nebraska. Authorities shot Kirk during the gunfight. In the wake of media coverage of these and
other such violent events, the Posse broke into
secretive cells, following Louis Beam’s “leaderless
resistance” model. The Posse’s rhetoric for decentralization, local government, economic reform, and
religious beliefs, however, continued to encourage
like-minded groups in the development of their
own movements.
Steve Shay
See also: Antisemitism; Freemen; Militias; OneWorld Government.
Reference
Cochran, James. 1990. Bitter Harvest: Gordon Kahl
and the Posse Comitatus. New York: Viking Press.

Pound, Ezra
One of the most influential and controversial figures
in twentieth-century literature, Ezra Pound was a
great poetic innovator and one of the essential
shapers of the cultural movement known as Modernism. He was also a purveyor of conspiracy theories, some concerning heretical medieval religious
cults, and others focusing on modern war and international finance, with the latter type often demonizing Jews. Ultimately, Pound wove these threads
together into a grand conspiracy myth.
Born in Hailey, Idaho, in 1885, Pound attended
Hamilton College and the University of Pennsylvania, where he distinguished himself in the study of
Romance languages and medieval literature. In
1906, Pound traveled to Europe to do thesis
research and, though he never completed his dissertation, he made fruitful discoveries, among them
a rare collection of troubadour manuscripts at the
Ambrosian Library in Milan.
Troubadours, Cathars, and the
“Mediterranean Sanity”
Troubadours, the singer/poets who came to prominence in twelfth-century Provence, became for

Pound, Ezra

Pound a focus of inspiration and fascinated inquiry.
The troubadours were also associated with the
Cathars, a religious movement based in Provence,
against which the Catholic Church waged a bloody
war, the Albigensian Crusade, from 1208 to 1229.
The brutality of the crusade was such that few if any
actual Cathar documents survived, a fact that
allowed later writers, often of an occultist bent, to
contradict Church accounts of the heresy.
In 1909, in London, Pound gave a series of lectures concerning such matters, collected as The
Spirit of Romance (1910), in which he suggested
that troubadour art reflected an ecstatic state of consciousness rooted in sensuous experience, highly
attuned perception, and a sacramental vision of
nature. Framing this sensibility as an outgrowth of
Greco-Roman paganism and later labeling it “the
Mediterranean sanity” (Pound 1935, 154), Pound
contrasted it with what he saw as the otherworldly,
life-denying thrust of Hebrew and Hindu religiosity.
Eventually, he speculated that troubadour culture
indicated the survival, underground in Provence, of
the Eleusinian mysteries and Hellenistic goddess
worship.
Pound’s version of Provençal spirituality contrasted sharply with the Church’s account of
Catharism, a fact that aroused Pound’s suspicion.
According to the Church, the Cathar heresy was
“Manichean”—that is, it preached a pessimistic
dualism that framed the body as a prison and the
cosmos as the devil’s creation. But, argued Pound,
“If there were any Manicheans” in twelfth-century
Provence, they “left no trace in troubadour art”
(Pound 1973, 159), a point that begged the question: Could two such radically different spiritualities
flourish at the same time, in the same small cultural
niche? Pound’s answer was that the heresy was not
what the Church had claimed it to be. Rather,
Cathars and troubadours must have been united in
devotion to a neopagan religiosity that the Church
had conspired to destroy and misrepresent.
The New Age, Social Credit,
and the “Causes of War”
Pound spent much of the period from 1911 to 1921
in England, where he married Dorothy Shakespear

and collaborated with older artistic masters like
W. B. Yeats as well as avant-garde innovators like
Wyndham Lewis. He produced a large body of
poetry, translations, and criticism while studying
theosophy, Japanese theater, and Chinese language
and philosophy. He also labored generously to promote the work of then-obscure contemporaries like
T. S. Eliot and James Joyce.
Pound published much of his prose from this
period in The New Age, a London-based journal of
politics and the arts edited by A. R. Orage, a proponent of Guild Socialism. Through Orage, Pound met
C. H. Douglas, whose theory of Social Credit proposed to right economic problems by counting the
cultural inheritance as a form of wealth held in common by all people of a nation. Like other socialist
groups, the New Age circle opposed British entry
into World War I, viewing the conflict as benefiting
only ruling elites and financial profiteers. Pound lost
several close friends to the war and depicted it in his
poetry as the self-destruction of “a botched civilization” (Pound 1957, 64). In a biographical sketch
from 1949, he wrote: “1918—began investigation of
causes of war, to oppose same” (Pound 1957, n.p.).
In 1921 Pound moved to Paris and, by 1924, on
to Italy, where he resided until the end of World
War II. During this period, he made headway on an
ambitious epic poem, The Cantos (1972), and
became increasingly isolated from friends and collaborators. He devoted great energy to a campaign
to popularize Social Credit, which he now saw as
the cure for modern social ills. Pound became
enthusiastic about Mussolini due to the fascist dictator’s apparent openness to Social Credit policies.
In various tracts, Pound argued that there were parallels between the thoughts of the Duce and that of
U.S. founders like Jefferson and Adams, and he
railed against the power of central banks like the
U.S. Federal Reserve and the Bank of England. In
1939, he voyaged to the United States for a lecture
tour. In Washington, D.C., he spoke with some congressmen about Social Credit and sought, unsuccessfully, to meet with President Franklin Roosevelt, whose policies he detested. Audiences and
old friends were disturbed by his obsession with
money and outbursts of antisemitism. Pound now
593

Pound, Ezra

attributed economic insecurity and modern war to
a conspiracy of powerful financial interests and,
increasingly, he identified those interests with the
Jews.
Fascism, Antisemitism,
and Private Mythology
Soon back in Italy, Pound began in 1941 to make
radio broadcasts sponsored by the fascist regime
that, he later claimed, were used only for “personal
propaganda in support of the U.S. Constitution”
(Pound 1957, n.p.). The broadcasts consisted
largely of obscure lectures about money and culture
laced with rants about alleged Jewish conspiracy. At
times the twisted logic of his conspiracism seemed
to catch Pound up, as in the following passage
where he mentions Protocols of the Elders of Zion,
the notorious antisemitic forgery purporting to document a Jewish plan for world domination. Pound
acknowledges the document to be a forgery, but still
attempts to recuperate his conspiracy scenario:
“Certainly they are a forgery, but this is one proof
we have of their authenticity. The Jews have worked
with forged documents for the past twenty-four
hundred years” (Pound 1978, 283). In 1941, in a
conversation that “shook” Pound, the leftist
Romano Bilenchi conveyed the story of an SS massacre of German Jews and insisted that “it was
Hitler and Himmler who had organized a conspiracy” (qtd. in Carpenter, 613); nonetheless, Pound
clung to his antisemitic beliefs.
Indeed, these beliefs were key to a private mythology that integrated the many divergent strands of
Pound’s intellectual concern. An idiosyncratic variation on Matthew Arnold’s idea that Western civilization swings between phases of Hebraism and Hellenism, this mythology framed European history as a
struggle between embattled exponents of the Hellenistic “Mediterranean sanity,” like the Cathars, and
groups, like the Calvinists, or the Jews themselves,
who supposedly pulled the West in a Hebraistic
direction.
Pound’s aversion to abstractions did not prevent
him from building his mythology around the crudest racist stereotypes. Far from being part of some
imagined Jewish “essence,” the association of Jews
594

with usury tracked back to the late medieval period
Pound knew so well, where moneylending, deemed
by the Church a sinful occupation for Christians,
became for Jews one of the few available professions. Similarly, the image of the Jew as unnatural
alien, poisoning the wells of Christendom, was a
staple of medieval rhetoric concerning enemies of
the Church.
Treason, Mental Illness, Silence
In 1943, the United States indicted Pound for treason and, when the Allies took Italy in 1945, he
became a prisoner of war. Initially held in Pisa, he
spent thirty-one days in an outdoor cage, eventually
being moved to Washington, D. C., to face charges.
With a conviction holding out the possibility of the
death penalty, defense lawyer Julien Cornell decided to plead Pound as insane. Indeed, old friends
like Ernest Hemingway pointed to Pound’s radio
broadcasts as proof that he had lost his wits years
before. Ultimately, a panel of psychiatrists and a
U.S. jury found Pound unfit to stand trial and he
was confined to St. Elizabeth’s, a Washington, D.C.,
hospital for the mentally ill, where he remained
from 1946 to 1958. St. Elizabeth’s director, Dr. Wilfred Overholser, found Pound to be suffering from
some sort of debilitating mental disorder and at
times used the word “paranoid” to describe his
mental state, though he never diagnosed him as
paranoid (i.e., schizophrenic) in the clinical sense of
the term.
In 1949, amid much controversy, Pound was
awarded the Bollingen Prize in American poetry. In
1957, literary supporters of Pound petitioned the
attorney general to drop the treason indictment and
in 1958 Pound gained release from St. Elizabeth’s,
shortly thereafter returning to Italy. He remained
mostly there until his death in 1972 and for many of
his last years he was seldom heard to speak, the
silence seeming to some like a sign of illness and to
others like self-imposed punishment. On rare occasions when he conversed with visitors, he characterized his work as a wrongheaded failure and “the
prejudice of antisemitism” as his “worst mistake”
(qtd. in Carpenter, 899).
John Kimsey

Protocols of the Elders of Zion

See also: Antisemitism; Bank of England; Federal
Reserve System; Holocaust, Denial of; Protocols of
the Elders of Zion.
References
Carpenter, Humphrey. 1990. A Serious Character:
The Life of Ezra Pound. New York: Delta.
Casillo, Robert. 1988. The Genealogy of Demons:
Anti-Semitism, Fascism, and the Myths of Ezra
Pound. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University
Press.
Makin, Peter. 1978. Provence and Pound. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Pound, Ezra. 1910. Spirit of Romance. London:
Faber.
———1935. Literary Essays of Ezra Pound. Edited
by T. S. Eliot. London: Faber.
———. 1957. Selected Poems of Ezra Pound. New
York: New Directions.
———. 1972. The Cantos. New York: New
Directions.
———. 1973. Selected Prose 1909–1965. Edited by
William Cookson. New York: New Directions.
———. 1978. “Ezra Pound Speaking”: Radio
Speeches of Ezra Pound. Edited by Leonard
Doob. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Sumption, Jonathan. 1978. The Albigensian
Crusade. Boston, MA: Faber.

Protocols of the Elders of Zion
Protocols of the Elders of Zion, sometimes entitled
Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion or Protocols
of the Wise Men of Zion, are a collection of statements supposedly made at a meeting of a secret,
conspiratorial Jewish cabal. The statements of the
“elders” are taken to reveal the cabal’s plans for
dominating the entire world. Through their secret
government, it is alleged, they will ultimately succeed in overthrowing nations, introducing a single
world economic system, and preparing the way for
a King of the Jews who will be “the real Pope of the
Universe, the patriarch of an international Church”
(Protocols, 58). For many believers in the Protocols,
this King of the Jews is none other than the
Antichrist; for more secular conspiracy theorists,
the outcome is a “one-world government” or “New
World Order” run by international (Jewish) bankers
(although these two interpretations are not mutually exclusive).

The Protocols were first proven to be a forgery in
1921 and are now almost universally recognized as
such. Yet their dubious authenticity has never substantially reduced their effectiveness as antisemitic
propaganda, and they have been used to support
anti-Jewish conspiracy theories from their first
appearance around 1900 right up until the present
day, perhaps most famously and most tragically in
Nazi Germany.
The Composition of the Protocols
Although the “writer” of the Protocols is unknown,
much of the text is derived from a nineteenthcentury political satire written in France by Maurice
Joly. In Joly’s Dialogue aux Enfers entre Montesquieu
et Machiavel (1864), the political philosophers Montesquieu and Machiavelli are engaged in debate, with
Montesquieu (the hero of the piece) arguing the case
for liberalism and Machiavelli (the villain and standin for Napoleon III) arguing the case for cynical despotism. As Norman Cohn points out in his indispensable Warrant for Genocide (1981), whoever
compiled the text of the Protocols seemed to do so
“in a hurry” (Cohn, 75) because the elders can be
found offering the arguments of both Montesquieu
and Machiavelli. Yet, ironically and tragically, this
apparent mistake resulted in one of the text’s great
“strengths” as right-wing propaganda, for the apparent contradiction between the two political philosophies is resolved as follows: the elders’ “true” goals
for world conquest through sinister political machinations are revealed in the Machiavelli passages,
while the Enlightenment liberalism advocated in the
Montesquieu passages is merely a ploy the elders use
to delude the “goy cattle.” Whether by accident or by
intention, the compiler of the Protocols managed to
forge the conceptual matrix that would allow generations of antisemitic conspiracy theorists to view
every liberal-progressive development in politics
(e.g., the formation of the UN, the development of
labor unions, the liberalization of trade, secularization, etc.) as merely a ploy of the international Jewish
conspiracy.
The rampant forces of globalized capitalism were
indeed causing many changes throughout Europe,
and the Protocols are quite clearly offering a dis595

Protocols of the Elders of Zion

torted—and ultimately deadly—metaphor for the
new economic world order. The elders want wars, for
instance, to be fought “on economic ground” (Protocols, 17), which is, of course, the sphere of their
power, for, as they remind us throughout the text,
they control the world’s gold. When nations subsume
their own sovereignty under the general rule of international economy, they are playing right into the elders’ hands. Money knows no national boundaries; it is
the international force par excellence. The elders
speak of capital in awed tones as an entity “which
possesses millions of eyes ever on the watch and
unhampered by any limitations whatsoever,” and it is
this that provides a clue about what lies behind the
antisemitic conspiracy theories the Protocols generate. As the U.S. literary scholar Frederic Jameson
points out, conspiracy theory can be understood as a
flawed attempt to comprehend a social totality that
is, ultimately, beyond comprehension. In this case,
the awesome power of globalization (i.e., global capitalism) itself is misunderstood as somehow being the
conscious scheme of a few individuals, rather than as
an impersonal force driven on by markets and banal,
everyday consumer self-interest. This particular
flawed understanding of the social totality is distinguished by its cruel scapegoating and its ability to
generate violence.
The History of the Protocols from
Nineteenth-Century Russia to the Holocaust
Though the origin of the Protocols is a complex subject, the general consensus is that the text resulted at
least in part from labors of Pyotr Ivanovich
Rachkovsky, the head of foreign operations for the
czarist secret police force, Okhrana. Rachkovsky may
well have commissioned the work as an attempt to
create support for a Franco-Russian league, ostensibly to counter the international Jewish conspiracy,
but no doubt more practically to offset other European military powers. While references within the
text to the French political scene cause scholars to
argue that the text was produced in France in 1897
or 1898, the Protocols first appear in print in Russia
(as early as 1903), with their “canonical” formulation
coming in the mystical writer Sergey Nilus’s ominously titled work, The Great in the Small: Antichrist
596

Considered as an Imminent Political Possibility
(1905). Nilus revised and expanded his work for publication just in time for the revolution, and it was predominantly the 1917 version, entitled He Is Near, at
the Door . . . Here Comes the Antichrist and the
Reign of the Devil on Earth, that furnished the world
with what was to become a startlingly popular explanation of both the October Revolution and World
War I.
Very quickly, the Bolsheviks’ opponents, the
White Russian forces, seized upon the Protocols as a
foreign policy tool. They believed, or at least wanted
others to believe, that the revolution was the work of
the elders. By distributing copies of the Protocols to
delegates at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 and
to government officials throughout Europe and the
United States, the White forces hoped to persuade
foreign powers to intervene in their civil war against
the Bolsheviks. In 1920 the Protocols were being
taken quite seriously in mainstream newspapers
such as the London Times. Editions began to appear
in many languages throughout Europe. Then Henry
Ford’s Dearborn Independent published a series of
ninety-one articles “explaining” the mysterious
power of Jews in the United States and introducing
the Protocols to a wide U.S. audience (the journal
had a readership that often neared 500,000).
Reprinted as The International Jew, Ford’s particularly U.S. version of the antisemitic conspiracy theory was shipped back to Europe and ultimately, in
the words of Norman Cohn, did “more than any
other work to make the Protocols world famous”
(Cohn, 159).
One of the many inconsistencies in the worldwide dissemination of the Protocols is the ways in
which the conspiracy theory was subtly warped
within each nation to fit the national strategic interests. While antisemites in each country believed the
Jews to be behind a secret world government or
conspiracy, they were in wild disagreement as to
who exactly was supposed to be in league with the
international Jewish conspiracy. In Germany, it was
believed that the City of London was the elders’
center of operations, and that the English actually
financed the Bolsheviks. In England, on the other
hand, it was supposed that Germany was in league

Puritans

with the Bolsheviks and the elders. In both cases is
quite clear that the Jews were being made a scapegoat in order to drum up opposition to each country’s strategic military and economic rivals.
Interest in the Protocols dramatically tapered off
in Britain when the London Times proved them to
be a forgery in August 1921. Yet certain radical elements in Germany refused to believe this. In Mein
Kampf, Hitler perversely argued that even if the
Protocols turned out to be a forgery, that did not
mean that the contents were untrue. In fact, for
Hitler, all of the public denunciations of the Protocols in the British papers and elsewhere proved all
the more that the Protocols represented things the
way they really are; after all, the elders themselves
announce in the Protocols that they already control
the press (Protocols, 30). In the end, the Protocols
formed one of the pillars of the Nazi ideology. Yet
not only did the Nazis found their antisemitism on
the Protocols, they also seemed entranced and profoundly influenced by the elders’ conspiracy. The
great irony of the situation has been pointed out by
Hannah Arendt: “the Nazis started with the fiction
of conspiracy and modeled themselves, more or less
consciously, after the secret society of the Elders of
Zion.” As is too often the case, the conspiracy theorists end up mirroring the very conspiracy they
ostensibly hope to eradicate (perhaps revealing the
psychological “projection” that all along formed the
basis of the racial hatred). The tragic result of this
ideology is well known—at least 6 million lives
destroyed in the Holocaust.
The Protocols Today
Though the Holocaust is the obscene climax of the
Protocols’ history, it is far from the end of the story.
To this day the Protocols are still used effectively in
anti-Israeli propaganda in the Middle East. The
Islamic Resistance Movement (Hamas) refers to the
Protocols in its “Covenant” as evidence of Zionist
expansionist policy. It suggests that the Protocols are
“the best proof” of its claim that Israel intends to
“expand from the Nile to the Euphrates.” The AntiDefamation League (ADL) keeps a running record
of positive references to the Protocols in more mainstream Middle Eastern media as well (particularly

those references found in Al-Hayat Al-Jadeeda, the
official newspaper of the Palestinian authority). In
the United States, Neo-Nazi groups, right-wing separatists, and the Nation of Islam have all distributed
(or been accused of distributing) copies of the Protocols (these groups are also tracked by the ADL).
The Internet has provided a cheaply accessible
forum for such groups to publicize their views, and
no doubt ensures that Protocols of the Elders of Zion
are more widely accessible today than ever.
Marlon Kuzmick
See also: Antisemitism; Coughlin, Father Charles;
Ford, Henry; Freemasonry; Holocaust, Denial of;
Nation of Islam; Neo-Nazis; New World Order;
One-World Government.
References
Arendt, Hannah. 1958. The Origins of
Totalitarianism. Cleveland, OH: World Publishing
Co.
Cohn, Norman. 1981. Warrant for Genocide: The
Myth of the Jewish World-Conspiracy and the
“Protocols of the Elders of Zion.” Chico, CA:
Scholars Press.
The International Jew: The World’s Foremost
Problem. 1920–1922. Vols. 1–4. Dearborn, MI:
The Dearborn Publishing Co.
Protocols of the Meetings of the Learned Elders of
Zion. 1931. Translated by Victor E. Marsden.
London: The Britons Publishing Society.
Website
The Hamas Covenant: http://www.library.cornell.
edu/colldev/mideast/hamas.htm.

Puritans
More than one commentator has noted the irony of
Puritan New England: that a society founded so idealistically as a haven of religious liberty would in turn
persecute religious dissenters. This observation
reflects significant misunderstandings about Puritan
beliefs, ideology, and identity. The existence of a
royal conspiracy to suppress the Puritan movement
in England was a key element in New England’s
founding mythology. However, the Puritans fled to
New England not to permit unfettered religious liberty but to acquire the “gospel liberty” to erect a
godly society—a “New Israel”—in accordance with
their specific beliefs. The Puritans saw themselves
597

Puritans

as a righteous remnant surrounded by enemies, and,
admonished by the knowledge that God’s blessing
on their society was predicated on its order and obedience, their religious and political psychology was
reflexively defensive. Tracing the New England
Puritans’ obsession with conspiracy theories helps
clarify the motivations for fleeing England and the
rationale for some of the acts of intolerance that still
give them a bad reputation.
The Puritans who began to arrive in America in
the 1630s were but a small portion of the participants in a fifty-year-old reform movement that originated in the Elizabethan Church of England. Best
understood as a loose, incomplete alliance of progressive Protestants composed of both clergy and
laypeople of middling and gentry status, the Puritans
worked to extend the Protestant Reformation in
England. Forsaking the “papist” rituals of the established Church of England, Puritans gathered in
autonomous congregations or “conventicles,” in
which membership was only extended to demonstrably pure individuals, called “saints” or the
“elect.” Moral legislation was also a key strategy to
remedying England’s “halfly reformed” society (Foster, 5). Distressed by what they saw as Anglicanism’s
turn back to Roman Catholic practices, they agitated
vociferously in their parishes and in Parliament for
religious purity in ways that earned them their
name, a derogatory epithet hurled by their many
detractors.
Opposition to Puritan reforms from the monarchy
and the moderate elements in the Church of
England was unending, but increased particularly
under the Stuarts, James I and Charles I, and
through the efforts of the bishop of London, William
Laud, who became archbishop of Canterbury in
1633. James I, who believed that abolishing the
national church would represent a threat to royal
prerogative, famously declared of the Puritans that
“I will harry them out of the land.” Laud, meanwhile, harassed Puritan clergy by manipulating the
Church of England bureaucracy. A climactic development occurred in 1629, when Charles I suspended the Puritan-dominated Parliament. This
effectively ended Puritan efforts by putting out of
reach the only possible avenue for legislating reli598

gious reform within the Church of England, and
hinted at a more menacing and repressive royal posture toward nonconformity.
The City on a Hill
Frustrated by these defeats, and fearful of more
persecution, a sizeable cohort of Puritans made the
difficult decision to leave an England they now
found intractably corrupt. A small vanguard left in
the late 1620s, founding Salem, Massachusetts, in
1629. What became known as the “Great Migration” began in 1630, when a flotilla of ships carrying
the colony’s first governor, John Winthrop, left
England for the New World. In a defining sermon
that set out the ideological and religious foundations for the new colony, Winthrop declared that
the emigrants were a covenant people of God, a
“New Israel” whose purpose was to create a godly
“City on a Hill” that would be a Christian beacon
for a lost and corrupt England.
The Puritan attempt to create a model society in
New England depended on a unique and durable
synthesis of church and state that came to be known
as the “Congregational Way.” Godly life was
ordered collectively, and the pillars of social purity
were the clergyman and the “godly magistrate.”
Church and state were separate, unlike the statesupported Anglican Church, but their roles were
complementary. At the center of each town was the
church, or meeting house, which often doubled as
the local court or town hall. Membership to the
congregation was carefully limited to those who
could demonstrate evidence of their conversion or
sanctification. Electoral franchise in local politics,
meanwhile, was only offered to church members.
Further, although they were not allowed to hold
public office, clergymen performed valuable civic
functions by preaching election sermons, or presiding over days of fasting in times of trouble. Moral
codes, such as New Haven’s famous “blue laws,”
were legislated and enforced to maintain order and
purity.
Maintaining Orthodoxy
While Puritan society was notable for the cohesiveness of its governing institutions, its divine mandate

Puritans

and its precarious place on the American frontier
made it deeply susceptible to rumors and conspiracy
theories. Particularly troubling was the problem of
religious sectarianism. As a last enclave of true Christianity, it was easy for Puritans to see conspiracies of
heretics arrayed against them, plots that ultimately
were of satanic derivation. Samuel Sewall, a prominent Boston merchant, like many of his compatriots,
was deeply fearful of “the plots of papists, Atheists,
&c.” (Sewall, 10). That New Englanders dealt with
heterodoxy in ways that often were immoderate
reflected their belief that conspiracies to gospel liberty—real and imagined—lay behind religious dissent and diversity.
The first challenges to New England’s religious
orthodoxy emerged in the first decade of settlement, and were led by two brilliant and charismatic
individuals, Roger Williams and Anne Hutchinson.
Beginning in 1634 Williams rocked the still evolving
orthodox Puritan establishment in New England by
arguing that the colony’s church-state matrix was
contrary to scriptural law. He objected to the idea
that civil authorities should suppress religious dissent, enforce church attendance, or protect the
practice of religion. His views advocating “soul liberty” and the strict separation of church and state
seem to anticipate the ideas of Thomas Jefferson
and James Madison, but his intention was quite different: he believed that any church-state alliance
invariably corrupted the church. Since gospel liberty depended on submission to proper civil and
religious authority, his ideas and popularity attacked
the nexus of Puritan social order and raised fears of
a wider sectarian conspiracy. He was banished from
Massachusetts in 1636 and settled in Rhode Island.
Anne Hutchinson’s challenge to New England’s
religious order, meanwhile, incited what came to be
known as the Antinomian Crisis (1636–1638). A brilliant woman, she expressed dissatisfaction with the
theology and preaching of many of the colony’s ministers. She held meetings in her Boston home that
attracted crowds of men and women, in which she
discussed and criticized the weekly sermons she had
heard. While the Puritan movement encouraged lay
participation in theological debate, her dissent, gender, and large following made her ministry particu-

larly controversial. As a threat to the clerical establishment, she was, like Williams, banished from the
colony—but not without a significant political struggle, because many of her male supporters included
a number of powerful merchants.
Having quelled dissent from within, New
England Puritans next faced a sectarian invasion
from without. Beginning in the 1650s, members of
the Quaker sect—an offshoot of radical Protestantism in England—began to arrive in Massachusetts, settling mainly in Salem and Boston. Beyond
significant theological differences, the Quakers were
a threat to Puritan society because they recognized
the authority of no civil government, refused to pay
taxes and serve in the militia, and acknowledged no
hierarchy of political leadership. They publicly
denounced the Puritan ministers as a bunch of hacks
or “hirelings.” Aggressive in their proselytizing, the
most radical form of Quaker witness was called
“going naked for a sign,” when Quaker women
would run naked through Puritan churches and civic
courts. In the words of a Puritan broadside, Quakerism was “destructive to fundamental trueths [sic]
of religion” (Pestana, 33). But New England’s leaders, who were not amused by the accusations of
ungodliness, ultimately failed to quell the threat to
their godly commonwealth. Faced with Puritan
repression—beatings, imprisonment, and even executions—the Quakers would not desist. The most
famous Quaker “martyr,” Mary Dyer, was a former
follower of Anne Hutchinson who converted to
Quakerism in the 1650s. In 1659 she and two comrades were convicted for apostasy in Boston and sentenced to death. Because the Puritan magistrates
feared a public outcry or possibly even an attack on
the town by other Quakers, her sentence was commuted and she was banished from Boston with the
threat of death should she return. She did, and she
was hanged on 1 June 1 1660 along with three other
Quakers. News of these executions spread to
England and attracted the negative attention of
King Charles II, and the Puritans were gradually
forced to amend their repressive tactics.
Unable to enforce religious uniformity, Puritan
clergy and magistrates resorted to persuasion to
maintain the godliness of New England society.
599

Puritans

While Quakers were the most visible challenge to
Puritan society, a more insidious threat came from
vice and disorder within New England. Puritan fear
of “declension,” or the perception that New England was falling away from its divinely ordained
mission, was the impetus for the pastor-led “Reformation of Manners,” a moral-reform campaign that
began in 1679. In sermons and laws, authorities targeted a whole host of practices and behaviors as
immoral: folk magic and witchcraft, harvest revels,
tavern culture, and sexual vice. Resisting immorality required vigilance, since pastors and magistrates
believed that disorder was not simply the random
expression of human nature, but was part of a
satanic plot to undermine the last enclave of true
Christianity.
From Colony to Province
If fears of heterodox conspiracies and moral laxity
preoccupied the Puritan ruling class, New England’s
vulnerable position as an isolated colonial outpost
was also a source of conspiracy theories. The Puritans fancied that they had founded their “City on a
Hill” in a “howling wilderness,” surrounded by real
and imagined enemies. Their Native American
neighbors were objects of suspicion and fear, and
New England fought two vicious wars against them,
the Pequot War (1637) and King Philip’s War
(1675–1676). Rumors of imminent Indian attack
were constant throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The “Eastern Indians” allied with
the French in Quebec and began attacking New
England in the 1680s, initiating a cycle of warfare
that would not cease until the 1760s. This combined
French and Indian threat had special connotations
in the Puritan religious and political imagination. As
a powerful Catholic nation, France and its imperial
ambitions represented nothing less than the temporal instrument of the papal Antichrist.
Thus Puritans refracted geopolitical developments and imperial adversaries through the lens of
their collective identity as a people with a divine
mission. More complicated, however, were New
England’s increasingly contentious relations with
England. While the Puritans had fled persecution,

600

they had never disavowed the mother country, nor
had they formally rejected the Church of England.
The founding charter signed by Charles I gave the
first Puritan colonists unprecedented powers of
self-rule, allowing them to select their own governor and erect the institutions that supported their
godly identity. Events in England—the Civil War,
the execution of Charles I, the rule of Oliver
Cromwell, and the Restoration of Charles II in
1660—meant that New England was effectively
independent for the first thirty years of its existence. Displeased with New England’s commercial
and religious independence, Charles II began to
reassert English control over the colonies. Historians debate when Puritan New England can be said
to have “ended,” but certainly a pivotal transition
occurred when Charles II revoked Massachusetts’s
charter in 1684. Authority was wrested from the
Puritan-elected governor and handed to a new royal
appointee, Governor Edmund Andros. This inaugurated a decade of the politics of conspiracy as the
established Puritan leadership and the newly
arrived royal representatives struggled for power.
Andros arrived in Boston in 1686 and immediately alienated the Puritan leadership. A devout
Anglican, he deliberately flouted Puritan religious
sensibilities and refused to defer to the deposed
Puritan elite in colonial decision-making. Fearing
their religious liberties were at risk, the Puritans
retaliated in two ways: they spread rumors about
Andros’s corruption and incompetence, and they
sent Increase Mather, the colony’s most important
clergyman, to London in 1688 to renegotiate the
charter with the new king, James II. However, in
another outbreak in the conflict between monarch
and Commons, James II—a Catholic advocate of
absolute monarchy—was overthrown in 1688 and
replaced by William III, a Protestant who was much
more conciliatory to parliamentary powers.
This “Glorious Revolution” had significant effects
in the American colonies. Hearing this news, the
New England Puritans acted preemptively. Declaring that Andros, as the appointee of James II, was no
longer the legitimate ruler, on 18 April 1689 the
leadership of Puritan Boston rose up and overthrew

Pynchon, Thomas

Andros. In documents justifying this coup, they
argued that Puritan New England had been
oppressed by Andros’s tyranny; he had led the
colony to disaster since the revocation of the old
charter in 1684. “[A]ll our concerns both Civil and
Sacred, have suffered by the Arbitrary Oppressions
of Unreasonable Men,” they wrote, and produced an
often hyperbolic litany of grievances and conspiracy
theories. They accused Andros of bungling a military
campaign against the Eastern Indians, which
resulted in great loss of life to New Englanders, and
of willfully suppressing news of the Glorious Revolution in England—which they characterized as “the
rescue [of] the English nation from imminent POPERY and SLAVERY”—in order to stay in power.
Implausibly, they also believed Andros to be complicit in an imminent attack on New England by
Catholic France, and claimed that the French
planned to kidnap the last Puritan governor of the
colony, Simon Bradstreet (A. B., 48–53). In short,
the Puritan leaders constructed from a potent stew
of rumor and conspiracy theories an ideological justification for overthrowing Andros, by which they
hoped to reconstitute the authority and political
institutions they had enjoyed under the old charter.
Significantly, however, the political rhetoric they
employed did not invoke so much the religious
idioms of godly liberty but reflected a new, more
secular vocabulary and claimed—in a premonition
of the American Revolution—that they acted in
defense of their “English liberties.”
This was a fleeting victory, however, since William
III was unwilling to restore the old charter. In 1691
Mather returned to New England with a new charter that irrevocably reshaped Puritan political life.
Electoral franchise based on church membership
and a government elected entirely within the colony
was replaced by a franchise based on property and a
government supervised from London (Hall,
252–253). Mather was convinced that this new charter was the best he could have obtained, but from
then on New England was governed through the
language of English constitutionalism, not the spiritual vision of the Puritan founders.
William Van Arragon

See also: Anti-Catholicism; Hutchinson, Anne;
Witchcraft.
References
“A. B.” [1689] 1972. “An Account of the Late
Revolutions in New England.” Pp. 48–53 in The
Glorious Revolution in America: Documents on
the Colonial Crisis of 1689, ed. Michael G. Hall,
Lawrence H. Leder, and Michael G. Kammen.
New York: W. W. Norton.
Anderson, Victoria DeJohn. 1991. New England’s
Generation: The Great Migration and the
Formation of Society and Culture in the
Seventeenth Century. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Foster, Stephen. 1991. The Long Argument: English
Puritanism and the Shaping of New England
Culture, 1570–1700. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press.
Gildrie, Richard P. 1994. The Profane, the Civil, and
the Godly: The Reformation of Manners in
Orthodox New England, 1679–1749. University
Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Hall, Michael G. 1988. The Last American Puritan:
The Life of Increase Mather, 1639–1723.
Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press.
Miller, Perry. 1953. The New England Mind: From
Colony to Province. Cambridge, MA: The
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Pestana, Carla Gardina. 1991. Quakers and Baptists
in Colonial Massachusetts. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Sewall, Samuel. 1973. The Diary of Samuel Sewall
1674–1729. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

Pynchon, Thomas
The defining figure of what has been called the
“paranoid style” of U.S. fiction, Thomas Pynchon is
also the most reclusive and mysterious U.S. novelist
of the 1960s generation. Using paranoia and conspiracy to shape both the form and content of much of
his work, Pynchon’s fiction is, like conspiracy theory
itself, huge and seemingly uncontrollable in scope,
exceptionally complex, consistently absurd and surreal, and quite possibly (or possibly not) totally interconnected. His novels include V. (1963), The Crying
of Lot 49 (1966), Gravity’s Rainbow (1973), a collection of short stories, Slow Learner (1984), Vineland
(1990), and Mason & Dixon (1997).

601

Pynchon, Thomas

Pynchon’s novels defy any effort at easy summary
and freely combine complex scientific concepts
with dirty limericks, philosophical ruminations on
historical causality and theological predestination,
and investigations of clandestine mail-delivery services and sentient lightbulbs, and like to pit dopesmoking freaks against military cabals, fascist corporate syndicates, and competing mind-control
cliques. Pynchon fills his novels with hundreds of
strange characters bearing stranger names like
Meatball Mulligan, Genghis Cohen, Mike Fallopian, Brock Vond, and the Revd Wicks Cherrycoke.
Although meticulously precise, his prose has the
outward appearance of being loose and uncontainable, deluging the reader with a textual excess that
brilliantly embodies the collision of seemingly selfcontained conceptual universes in postmodern U.S.
culture. The reader is faced with the delightful if
paranoia-inducing task of searching out meaningful
connections within the narrative’s frenetically multiplying plots, wild conspiracies, and allegorical
details. Pynchon’s distinctively nonlinear and fragmented stories are nonetheless built around a quest
for knowledge or to uncover some “plot,” but, as he
writes in V., “in this search motive is part of the
quarry.” Yet every quest and every plot seems too
complex, too interconnected for the protagonists to
unravel, let alone take control of. The result is a
series of novels and meanings that are, as he writes
in Gravity’s Rainbow, “not a disentanglement from,
but a progressive knotting into.”
Unlike his novels, what is known of Pynchon’s
biography can be easily summarized. Thomas Ruggles Pynchon was born on 8 May 1937 on Long
Island, New York. He attended Oyster Bay High
School and won a scholarship to Cornell University.
There he began as a student of engineering physics,
but after leaving to join the Navy Signal Corps for
two years, Pynchon returned to Cornell where he
graduated with a degree in English in 1959. While
at Cornell, Pynchon is known to have taken a class
from Vladimir Nabokov, befriended the novelist
Richard Fariña, and edited the Cornell Writer,
where he published his first short story. In a rare
personal essay, Pynchon wrote about the highly

602

contradictory literary and cultural influences of the
late 1950s that, in retrospect, are flawlessly synthesized in his mature style: Kerouac and Henry
Adams, surrealism and Spike Jones, the Evergreen
Review and Cybernetics, jazz clubs and British spy
thrillers, marijuana and Edmund Wilson.
After college, Pynchon moved to Greenwich Village where he began writing his first novel. In 1960
he moved to Seattle and worked for Boeing as a
writer of technical manuals. Two years later, Pynchon moved to southern California and on to Mexico where he finished V. A picaresque novel of two
deeply opposite men and “the whole sick crew,” V.
is ostensibly centered around a search for conspiratorial meaning, which animates the novel’s movement. Unlike the perfect “schlemihl,” Benny Profane, Herbert Stencil is a joyless adventurer
dedicated to searching for V., a woman who may or
may not exist, but who he nonetheless believes is
connected to the “century’s great cabals” that periodically reappear during moments of rebellion
around the world. V. may embody the secret history
of the twentieth century or she may simply be the
paranoid’s conspiracy theory incarnate. V. received
the William Faulkner award for the best first novel
of the year, and the New York Times said of V.’s
“recluse” of an author, “no matter what his circumstances, or where he’s doing it, there is at work a
young writer of staggering promise.”
The Crying of Lot 49 is Pynchon’s second novel
and by virtue of its brevity and linear plot, it continues to be his most widely read and least Pynchonesque work. Lot 49 tells the story of Oedipa
Maas and her quest to unravel the estate of her fabulously wealthy former lover Pierce Inverarity. In
her pursuit, Oedipa encounters a broad range of
southern California subcultures including LSDexperimenting doctors, right-wing nuts, a rock band
called the Paranoids, and a gang of engineers at
Yoyodyne Aerospace. Across the highways and
undergrounds of San Narcisco, Oedipa learns to
read the signs and experience “revelations which
now seemed to come crowding in exponentially, as
if the more she collected the more would come to
her, until everything she saw, smelled, dreamed, re-

Pynchon, Thomas

membered, would somehow come to be woven into
The Tristero.” Indeed, Oedipa finds evidence for
the Tristero—a sinister alternative postal delivery
system—in everything from a sixteenth-century
Jacobean revenge tragedy to a machine based on
Maxwell’s Demon. After reaching the point of
exhaustion, Oedipa realizes that either the Trystero
is real (i.e., an actual conspiracy), or Pierce has been
playing a joke on her (which would fuel her paranoia), or, most unsettling of all, everything is just
random and meaningless in a universe devoid of
coherence. Or, perhaps, she, like everyone around
her, is just losing her mind. But in the end, Oedipa,
like Stencil, realizes that she would rather believe in
the connection—no matter how absurd or cruel—
than in no connection at all. But, of course, the final
revelation in this parodic detective novel is ultimately withheld.
Gravity’s Rainbow is Thomas Pynchon’s masterpiece, an 800-page blend of rocket science with Bmovies, organic chemistry with Rilke, and German
history with silly songs and innuendoes, which many
critics believe to be postmodernism’s equal to Moby
Dick and Ulysses. When it is discovered that Lieutenant Tyrone Slothrop’s erections can predict the
impact sites of V-2 rockets falling on London, the
quest is on to uncover the mystery of Rocket 00000.
What follows, or more properly, what is woven into
this ostensible plot is a wild series of adventures
across war-torn Europe. Gravity’s Rainbow features
a strange collection of slobs, lovers, and “preterite”
wanderers foolishly led by Slothrop—including a
submarine full of Argentine anarchists and an army
of suicidal African “Schwarzkommandos”—who
eventually merge into a motley “Counterforce” to do
battle with the international intelligence agencies
and corporate conspiracies of the elect.
In the course of his adventures, Slothrop comes
across five “Proverbs for Paranoids” that, like unreliable signposts, guide Slothrop and the reader alike
through “the Zone”: (1) “You may never get to
touch the Master, but you can tickle his creatures,”
(2) “The innocence of the creatures is in inverse
proportions to the immorality of the Master,” (3) “If
they can get you asking the wrong questions, they

don’t have to worry about answers,” (4) “You hide,
they seek,” and (5) “Paranoids are not paranoids
because they are paranoid, but because they keep
putting themselves, fucking idiots, deliberately into
paranoid situations.”
Gravity’s Rainbow is encyclopedic in scope, and
probably more frequently abandoned than actually
read cover to cover. The experience of reading it is
perhaps best described in a passage from the book
itself: “Like other sorts of paranoia, it is nothing less
than the onset, the leading edge, of the discovery
that everything is connected, everything in the Creation, a secondary illumination—not yet blindingly
One but at least connected, and perhaps a route In
for those . . . who are held at the edge.” While in V.
and Lot 49 conspiracy and paranoia are the ideas of
a single character, Gravity’s Rainbow turns this into
a universal logic, and not just of individual psychology or political organization, but as a metaphysical
category behind technology and the physics of gravity itself.
In 1990 Pynchon returned with Vineland, a novel
set in 1984 amidst the forests of northern California
and structured around a young woman’s effort to
understand her parents’ lives as 1960s hippies and
(counter)revolutionaries. Seven years later, Pynchon published his own eighteenth-century novel,
Mason & Dixon, about two friends whose efforts at
imposing a scientific order upon the world through
measuring the transom of Venus or surveying the
southern border of Pennsylvania find only mayhem
and chaos in the Age of Reason.
As of 2002, Thomas Pynchon is believed to live in
New York City and continues to refuse any offer to
be photographed or interviewed. Of course, this
obsessive privacy has generated a kind of cult of
personality around Pynchon, suggesting that the
paranoia of his novels is also a factor in his own life.
But whatever his reasons, Pynchon’s friends evidently do a good job of protecting his anonymity, for
he is neither a loner nor hermit, but rejects the kind
of public personality that he could easily claim as
one of most important living novelists in the
English language.
Michael Cohen

603

Pynchon, Thomas

References
Pynchon, Thomas. 1963. V. New York: Lippincott.
———. 1966. The Crying of Lot 49. New York:
Lippincott.
———. 1973. Gravity’s Rainbow. New York: Viking.
———. 1984. Slow Learner. Boston: Little, Brown
& Co.
———. 1990. Vineland. Boston: Little, Brown &
Co.

604

–––——. 1997. Mason & Dixon. New York: Henry
Holt & Company.
Siegel, Jules. 1977. “Who Is Thomas Pynchon and
Why Did He Take Off with My Wife?” Playboy,
March, 121–122; 168–174.
Winston, Mathew. 1976. “The Quest for Pynchon.”
Pp. 139–159 in Mindful Pleasures, ed. George
Levine and David Leverenz. Boston: Little,
Brown & Co.

Q
Quebec Act
Both the timing and provisions of the Quebec Act
(passed into law by the British Parliament on 22 June
1774, with a date of enactment of 1 May 1775) convinced many residents of the original thirteen British
North American colonies that metropolitan officials
were conspiring to deprive them of their liberties.
American colonists, predisposed by parliamentary
legislation over the previous decade to see evil intent
in any policy initiative of the British ministry, were
joined by the Whig opposition in British Parliament
in their vehement protests against the Quebec Act
because of its apparent threat to the colonies’ political, religious, and economic interests. Passed hastily
late in a parliamentary session, with all official papers
connected to its preparation suppressed, and with
the public barred from the most controversial
debates, significant colonial and British interests
regarded the Quebec Act as part of a larger plot to
subvert the English constitution on both sides of the
Atlantic.
While the Quebec Act appeared shortly after the
Coercive Acts (it was explicitly associated with those
acts by American supporters of independence from
Great Britain), considerable evidence indicates that
most of the act’s basic provisions had been under
consideration by imperial officials for nearly a
decade. Designed to resolve problems of British
governance in French-speaking Canada (renamed
Quebec after the conquest of 1760), the Quebec Act
provided for the establishment of the Catholic
Church in the province, preserved existing French

civil law alongside English criminal law, maintained
the system of seigneurial land tenure, and arranged
for all political authority to reside with the governor
and an appointed executive council. A final significant element, the imposition of a western boundary
that extended provincial jurisdiction into the Ohio
River valley, was added to the draft legislation of the
Quebec Act after news of the Boston Tea Party (16
December 1773) reached England.
Clearly intended to reconcile the Canadian population to life under British rule, the act has been
praised by modern historians for its liberal and tolerant elements. Yet many American colonists, as well as
the small British population residing in Quebec,
expressed shock and horror over the unprecedented
nature of the Quebec Act’s provisions for the hated
Catholic Church. Strident anti-Catholicism explains
why, although the Quebec Act nullified the western
claims of four American colonies and imposed nonrepresentative government on a vast expanse of the
continental interior, the loudest protests against it
came from Protestant New England. There memories of devastating raids by parties of French Canadians and allied Native Americans during intercolonial
wars still haunted the collective consciousness. The
view that the Quebec Act represented a conspiracy
arose principally out of speculation over British
Prime Minister Sir Frederick North’s aims in enacting the law. Suspicious critics on both sides of the
Atlantic interpreted the content and timing of the
Quebec Act as a signal of the North ministry’s intention to restrict the recalcitrant thirteen colonies to
605

Quebec Act

the Atlantic seaboard, and to employ a pacified
Canadian territory and population as a base for offensive operations in the event of armed conflict with
the colonial American population.
Unbeknownst to many of its opponents, strategic
considerations regarding Canada were in fact at the
heart of the Quebec Act. Imperial policymakers
placed great weight on the opinions of Sir Guy Carleton, Quebec’s military governor. Carleton thought
of Quebec in military terms, and considered his key
problem to be one of securing the allegiance of the
French Catholic majority, especially in the context
of increasing instability in the thirteen colonies after
1765. His recommendations, based on his belief in
the social influence of Quebec’s seigneurs and
clergy, were intended to insulate the province from
the growing radicalism of the thirteen colonies.
The omnibus nature of the Quebec Act meant
that it likely offended more colonial Americans and
British Whigs than any other single piece of imperial
legislation during the decade prior to the outbreak
of the Revolutionary War. The American Continental Congress, meeting in Philadelphia in October
1774, determined to insist that Parliament repeal
the Quebec Act on the grounds that it constituted a
parliamentary effort “by the influence of civil principles and ancient prejudices, to dispose the inhabitants [of Quebec] to act with hostility against the
free Protestant colonies, whenever a wicked ministry shall chuse to direct them” (Ammerman, 70).
Opponents of the Quebec Act in Britain went even
further, arguing that the Quebec Act subverted the
church, law, and constitution of England at one
stroke, and warning of the grave consequences of
“digging the pit for America into which we ourselves
must fall” (Lawson, 135). Additionally, had the terms
of the Quebec Act been followed to the letter, the
Canadian habitants might have realized that this
ostensibly liberal policy actually placed severe limitations on the traditional exercise of church authority in Quebec, and that it reflected a policy of “gen-

606

tle but steady and determined anglicization” (Neatby, 140).
If the Quebec Act’s creators truly believed that in
1774 they could pass such legislation without bothering to consider the broader context of potential reaction to its provisions on both sides of the Atlantic, it
would appear to indicate, at best, their astonishing
political tone-deafness in the midst of an imperial crisis. At worst, the Quebec Act could be viewed as a
reflection of the North ministry’s desire to permit the
appearance of conspiratorial policymaking against
constitutional interests on both sides of the Atlantic
in order to present a show of force against colonial
and domestic opposition. Expressions of suspicion
concerning the Quebec Act, emanating in Britain and
America, represented more than simply “a stick with
which to beat the ministry” (Lawson, 149). The Quebec Act violated the imperial axiom of the British
constitution following the flag, it appeared to repudiate the idea of Protestant ascendancy, and it appeared
amidst a number of other political developments that
appeared to threaten the constitution at home and
throughout the larger empire.
Jon W. Parmenter
See also: American Revolution; Boston Tea Party;
Coercive Acts.
References
Ammerman, David. 1974. In the Common Cause:
American Response to the Coercive Acts of 1774.
Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press.
Lawson, Philip. 1990. The Imperial Challenge:
Quebec and Britain in the Age of the American
Revolution. Montreal and Kingston: McGillQueen’s University Press.
Milobar, David. 1995. “Quebec Reform, the British
Constitution, and the Atlantic Empire,
1774–1775.” Parliamentary History 14: 65–88.
Neatby, Hilda. 1966. Quebec: The Revolutionary
Age, 1760–1791. Toronto: McClelland and
Stewart.
Thomas, Peter D. G. 1991. Tea Party to
Independence: The Third Phase of the American
Revolution, 1773–1776. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

R
Rap
It should come as little surprise that conspiracy thinking circulates in rap music. This black musical form—
comprising rapping MCs, record-spinning DJs, and
studio producers—first emerged in America’s deteriorating urban centers in the late 1970s. From these
subcultural beginnings, it has developed and diversified into a mass market form, while sustaining vital
connections to black lived experience. Reasons why
rap music, which has deep roots in black oral culture,
should include conspiracy motifs extend all the way
back to the first coordinated conspiracy directed
against black people in the United States: the slavery
system of race-based labor exploitation. In the contemporary era, white supremacism is of course less
state-sanctioned, following gains made by blacks culminating in the civil rights movement of the midtwentieth century. However, though often harder to
identify, institutional discrimination and race-based
prejudice are still widespread in contemporary
America. Many black and working-class Americans
have lost ground economically over the past thirty
years, casualties of rising inequality and free-market
fundamentalism. These social conditions have given
rise to new kinds of conspiracy stories and “urban legends” (Turner), which found rich and varied expression in rap music.
Rap’s conspiracy mode was often highly politicized. Black nationalist rap, peaking in the years
around the turn of the 1990s, compellingly critiqued
white power structures, often construed as a vast conspiracy. The highly influential group Public Enemy

released Fear of a Black Planet (1990), the title playing with white fears about black power. The title of
the group’s follow-up album, Apocalypse 91: The
Enemy Strikes Black (1991), sensationally casts political struggle as a global race conflict. Other groups
aestheticized their distrust of official knowledge and
dominant structures in less pointedly political ways.
East Coast ghettocentric rapper Prodigy, from Mobb
Deep, among many others, fashioned images about
clandestine power elites: “Illuminati wants my mind,
soul, and my body / Secret society, trying to keep an
eye on me” (rapping on LL Cool J’s “I Shot Ya
Remix,” 1995). In more pedagogic and religious
terms, Poor Righteous Teachers released an album
entitled New World Order (1995). These artists shift
between fantastical, other-worldly visions and more
socially driven expositions of frightening actual world
order developments: technologized surveillance and
exploding incarceration rates (Smith and Fiske). For
rapper Coolio, the neighborhoods of South Central
Los Angeles became a “penitentiary culture” in the
1980s, its bounds traveling well beyond the many
actual prisons located in “Fortress LA” (Davis).
Of the more psychologized and hallucinatory rap
portrayals, Tupac Shakur, Geto Boys, and Wu-Tang
Clan are notably inventive. Houston’s Geto Boys are
best known for their 1991 hit “My Mind Is Playing
Tricks on Me,” which, according to Source magazine, “took us on a terrifying trip through the mind
of a gangster under the gun.” Tapping into the masculinist paranoia of “ghetto survival,” such tracks
were highly compelling, telling tales of insomnia,
607

Rap

Members of the rap group NWA, including DJ Yella, MC Ren, Eazy-E (2nd from right), and Dr. Dre (right), standing in
front of an abandoned convenience store. (Corbis)

heavy alcohol consumption, suicidal thoughts, and
paranoid delusions. Wu-Tang Clan’s hallucinatory
journeys, by contrast, were much more expansive
and surreal. This nine-strong collective from Staten
Island, New York, launched its esoteric, blacknationalist philosophy of “living mathematics” on its
debut Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers) (1993).
Adopting a dizzying array of personas and monikers
(leading rapper Method Man is aka Johnny Blaze,
Iron Lung, Johnny Dangerous, etc.), Wu-Tang combines Five Percent philosophy (an off-shoot of the
Nation of Islam religion) with manifold pop-cultural
references taken from Mafia lore, ufology, children’s
television, and above all martial arts. The recipe produces paradoxically gritty but trippy albums and a
full-blown but coded conspiracist mode. Notable
examples include the age-old mysticism of GZA’s
Liquid Swords (1995) and Method Man’s mentally
claustrophobic and apocalyptically titled Tical 2000:
Judgement Day (1998).
608

As rap flooded the mainstream in the mid-1990s,
rap stars continued to mobilize apocalyptic, conspiracy-laced images to less political ends. Busta Rhymes,
for instance, offers Armageddon-style prophesies on
his best-selling albums, When Disaster Strikes (1997)
and Extinction Level Event (1998)—usually amounting to high-decibel boasts about his own vocal
prowess. The style and themes of celebrated video
director Hype Williams are also decidedly futuristic,
including his award-winning clip for Tupac and Dr.
Dre’s “California Love” (1996), which depicts a
dystopian future-desert of campfires and rusty cybertechnology reminiscent of the Mad Max films.
Although politically conscious and alternative rappers
continue to deploy conspiracy themes to express and
explain the confounding experiences of America’s
black youth, mainstream acts more routinely explore
the grandiose, explosive, and marketable dimensions
of power, conspiracy, and paranoia.
Eithne Quinn

Reagan, Ronald, Attempted Assassination of

See also: Shakur, Tupac.
References
Davis, Mike. 1990. City of Quartz: Excavating the
Future in Los Angeles. New York: Verso.
Knight, Peter. 2000. Conspiracy Culture: From the
Kennedy Assassination to “The X Files.” New
York and London: Routledge.
Smith, Christopher Holmes, and John Fiske. 2000.
“Naming the Illuminati.” Pp. 605–621 in Music
and the Racial Imagination, ed. Ronald Radano
and Philip Bohlman. Chicago, IL: Chicago
University Press.
Turner, Patricia. 1993. I Heard It through the
Grapevine: Rumor in African-American Culture.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

Reagan, Ronald, Attempted Assassination of
On 30 March 1981, John Hinckley, Jr., shot and
nearly killed President Ronald Reagan outside a
hotel in Washington, D.C. Hinckley was fascinated
with the movie Taxi Driver, and imagined himself as
Robert DeNiro’s character, Travis Bickle. Just as
Travis Bickle stalked a presidential candidate, Hinckley stalked a number of politicians. Hinckley became
fixated on Jodie Foster, who played a prostitute in the
movie, and hoped to prove his love for her by killing
the president. Conspiracy theorists note the links
between the Hinckley family and the Bush family,
and between the Bush family and the CIA, and suggest that Hinckley was a chemically programmed
assassin (like Sirhan Sirhan, the assassin of Robert
Kennedy) designed to remove Reagan and bring
Bush to power.
John Hinckley enjoyed a life of affluence and privilege growing up as the son of a petroleum engineer
in Oklahoma and Texas. Hinckley’s elder brother and
sister were popular and successful, but John became
increasingly withdrawn and isolated in high school.
After graduating in 1973, he drifted for seven years,
too lazy, immature, and irresponsible to hold a job or
obtain a college degree. He depended on his parents
for money, and several times returned to live with
them. He became fascinated with assassins, extremist groups, and death, and purchased a number of
firearms. He was also obsessed with the movie Taxi
Driver, and after his efforts to achieve any sort of personal relationship with Jodie Foster proved futile, he

began to think of assassinating politicians to get her
attention. In 1980, he stalked President Jimmy
Carter and Senator Edward Kennedy. When his
father threw him out of the family home in March
1981, Hinckley took the bus to Washington to stalk
President Reagan.
Hinckley loitered outside the Washington Hilton,
and when Reagan emerged, Hinckley fired six shots
from a distance of 10 feet with a .22-caliber pistol
loaded with “Devastator” exploding bullets. Shots
hit the White House press secretary, a policeman,
and a Secret Service agent, and one shot ricocheted
off the limousine and struck the president under the
arm. The bullet lodged in Reagan’s lung, a short distance from the heart, but the president eventually
recuperated. Hinckley was arrested, but his father
hired powerful attorneys and psychiatrists to defend
him. Acquitted on grounds of insanity, Hinckley
remains institutionalized today.
Conspiracy theories surrounding the assassination attempt focus firstly on the connections
between the Hinckley family and the Bush family.
Vice-President Bush and Jack Hinckley (John’s
father) were both Texas oilmen, and naturally knew
each other. Jack Hinckley had contributed heavily
to Bush’s 1980 presidential campaign, and the day
of the assassination John’s older brother was scheduled to meet Neil Bush, the vice-president’s son.
Bush obviously would have benefited from the
death of Reagan, not least because Bush was the
leader of the northeastern “liberal” faction and Reagan was the leader of the western “hawkish” faction.
The northeastern faction—which conspiracy theorists usually associate with Kissinger and the Rockefellers—favored détente with the Soviet Union,
and in 1981 was locked in a bitter policy struggle
with the westerners, who favored confrontation
with the Soviets. Reagan’s death would instantly
have brought the détente faction to power, but his
survival meant that U.S.-Soviet confrontation continued until the westerners were fatally compromised in the Iran-Contra scandal (which conspiracy
theorists regard as a “silent coup”).
Conspiracy theorists note that Bush was long
associated with the CIA. Bush was director in the
late 1970s, but some theorists contend that he
609

Red Scare

served CIA interests as far back as the 1961 Bay of
Pigs invasion. In this view, Bush could have
employed his CIA contacts to turn John Hinckley
into a chemically programmed assassin, like Frank
Sinatra’s character in The Manchurian Candidate.
Some conspiracy theorists note that the CIA has
experimented with mind control in the past (Project
MK-ULTRA), and believe that the CIA has manipulated many notable “nuts”—including Lee Harvey
Oswald, Sirhan Sirhan, James Earl Ray, David
Berkowitz, Charles Manson, and the 2002 Beltway
Snipers—into committing murder. These theorists
note that before the assassination attempt, Hinckley’s father hired psychiatrists to treat John. They
believe that these psychiatrists gave John psychoactive drugs and hypnotically programmed him to kill.
Some conspiracy theorists argue that Hinckley was
a patsy—he was at the scene of the crime, and fired
a gun, but did not shoot the president. They reject
Hinckley’s testimony on his actions that day, since
Hinckley was mentally disturbed and under the influence of valium. They analyze the videotapes of the
event with the same painstaking attention to detail
applied to the Zapruder film, and insist that Reagan
was already inside the limousine when Hinckley fired
the shot that supposedly hit him. They note the confusion at the hospital regarding exactly what type of
bullet struck the president, and argue that a second
gunman would explain this confusion and the discrepancies in the government version of events.
Interestingly, just after the assassination attempt,
NBC correspondent Judy Woodruff reported that
someone fired a shot from the hotel above the presidential limousine. Other theorists contend that the
Secret Service was part of the plot—they deliberately
“gave Hinckley a chance” outside the hotel, or shot
the president themselves. These theories are analogous to the theories that the Secret Service purposely
botched their protection of John F. Kennedy and may
even have shot him themselves.
There can be no doubt that conspiracy theories
would flourish even more richly around this assassination attempt if Reagan had died. This assassination attempt has parallels in other assassinations—
the lone nut, sloppy security, the question of “who
benefits?”—but the theories in the Reagan case
610

have not been as fully fleshed out as in the cases of
successful assassinations. A successful assassination
of President Reagan would doubtless also raise conspiracy questions about Soviet involvement, since
Reagan was relentlessly anti-Soviet, and at the time
of the attempt, the Soviets were on the verge of
invading Poland.
James D. Perry
See also: Bush, George; Central Intelligence
Agency; Iran-Contra; LSD; The Manchurian
Candidate; Mind Control; MK-ULTRA.
References
Abrams, Herbert L. 1992. “The President Has Been
Shot.” New York: W. W. Norton.
Clarke, James W. 1990. On Being Mad or Merely
Angry. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Proctor, Lee, Roger Shoffner, and Robert L.
McCartor. Undated. “John Hinckley and the
Assassination Attempt on President Reagan.”
http://www.totse.com/en/conspiracy/institutional_
analysis/hinkdisp.html.

Red Scare
As early as 1848, the color red was used to refer to
socialism, and was derived from the color of a party
badge. With the revolution in Russia in 1917, it
became common to use the color red to refer to anything remotely revolutionary, including anarchism,
bolshevism, or communism. When the United States
became nearly hysterical with a fear of revolutionary
infiltrators, the phrase “red scare” was coined. The
term has been used to describe two different periods
in U.S. history, both of which were characterized by a
pervasive fear of a worldwide conspiracy, and both
scares resulted in wide-ranging societal reactions. The
first period occurred during the years after World
War I, from 1919 to about 1921, and the sensitivity
then stemmed from a fear that the 1917 Russian Revolution was the beginning of a worldwide spread of
bolshevism. The first red scare has been overshadowed by the second, which, of much longer duration,
followed World War II and endured until about 1955,
fueled by a fear of the spread of communism.
Each red scare was characterized by a willingness
on the part of the U.S. societal and governmental
infrastructure to take seriously the possibility that an

Red Scare

antidemocratic, anticapitalist international conspiracy was afoot. Existing agencies at the federal, state,
and local levels were expanded, and new entities
were created, to observe, analyze, and address this
amorphous, unidentified threat.
Red Scare of 1919–1921
Each red scare is identified with a high-ranking federal official, who acted as a promoter and driving
force. In the first, it was Attorney General A. Mitchell
Palmer, whose inflammatory rhetoric often used the
word “red.” Attorney General Palmer was afraid of a
“red menace” made up of anarchists, radicals, “Bolshevik propagandists,” and revolutionaries, whom he
suspected of trying to infiltrate and pollute the U.S.
labor movement. He feared the theme song of the
proletarian revolution, “The New International,” and
believed that it would help spread the socialist philosophy “like wildfire.” Labor unrest and a series of
letter bombs served as evidence for Palmer that
unprecedented, sinister organizing at a national level
was taking place. Palmer argued persuasively before
Congress that any aliens deemed dangerous should
be deported without need to show cause. Eventually
this led to a series of mass arrests known as the
Palmer Raids, in which thousands of suspected radicals in several cities were detained pending deportation, including the well-known socialist Emma Goldman. Of the thousands detained, only a fraction were
actually deported, because so many civil liberties
were violated during the arrests that the cases were
eventually thrown out. The Palmer Raids were ultimately an embarrassment to Attorney General
Palmer and anyone else associated with them.
Groups with national reach took up the red scare
cause, promoting fear through pamphlets, exposés,
and news releases. From the National Security
League, the American Defense Society, the National
Civic Foundation, and the American Legion, to the
American Federation of Labor and the U.S. Army
and Navy, the message was that the United States
was in danger of subversion.
Race was a focus of red scare fear. The federal
government was convinced that American blacks as
a group were vulnerable to the persuasions of the
Bolsheviks, and much money and resources were

allotted to monitoring and infiltrating radical black
activity. The Justice Department, the Bureau of
Investigation, the State Department, the General
Intelligence Division, the Department of the Post
Office, the Military Intelligence Division, and the
Office of Naval Intelligence are all on record as having made it their business to find a link between Bolshevik propaganda and black militancy. Black publications, including the Messenger, the Defender, the
Whip, the Crusader, and the Emancipator were
carefully watched for what was referred to as “negro
subversion.” Some of the weekly newspapers and
monthly magazines were investigated and censured,
and in some cases were withheld from distribution,
or confiscated altogether. The Post Office sometimes revoked the second-class permit of a publication, forcing an underfunded publisher to pay firstclass postage rates, effectively silencing the issue
(Kornweibel).
During the first red scare, many state governments formed committees to address rising fears.
The New York state legislature, for example, established the Joint Legislative Committee Investigating
Seditious Activities, known as the Lusk Committee,
which published in 1920 a four-volume report numbering 4,450 pages, entitled Revolutionary Radicalism: Its History, Purpose, and Tactics. As an extreme
example of the general timbre of the moment, the
Lusk Committee devoted an inordinate amount of
time and personnel toward thoroughly investigating
all aspects of the potential radical threat. While
much of what they documented was accurate—for
example, they quoted extensively from Socialist publications—somehow the conclusion they reached,
that the United States was vulnerable to the ideals of
bolshevism, proved unfounded.
A component of the first red scare was the perception that a radical trade unionism, referred to as
syndicalism, was gearing up to destroy capitalism in
the United States and establish a new social order,
ruled by the workers. Personified by the Industrial
Workers of the World (IWW or the “Wobblies”), syndicalism’s major tactic was the general strike and syndicalists were widely believed to support the use of
violence to achieve their aims. The Seattle general
strike of 1919, the first general walkout in the United
611

Red Scare

States, as well as the Boston police strike, the
Lawrence textile strike, the national coal strike, and
the great steel strike, led state governments, such as
Michigan, Kansas, California, and Washington, to
put into place antisyndicalism legislation. Under
these laws, anyone holding a gathering suspected of
being radical in nature could be charged, and anyone
so charged who was an alien could then be deported.
In reality, the radical movements at this time
were not a tight-knit conspiracy of violent antigovernment activists, and there was great dissension
among radicals, in philosophy as well as strategy.
Socialists differed from Communists, who themselves were diametrically split. Socialists believed in
Marxism, and one Communist group supported
Stalin while the other favored Lenin and Trotsky.
One group advocated change from within, and
moderate political action, while the other preferred
revolutionary activism. Congruent conventions held
by the different groups in 1919 were clear demonstrations of their lack of unity and purpose.
Red Scare of 1947–1955
The champion of the second red scare was Wisconsin senator Joseph McCarthy. While a growing conservative movement at both the national and local
level was an integral component in the manifestation of the scare, McCarthy’s association with the
second red scare is so complete that the phenomenon itself and the extreme behaviors associated with
it are referred to as McCarthyism. McCarthy, like
Palmer, was afraid of a red menace, but by the time
McCarthy’s menace surfaced, the various strains of
socialism and radicalism had coalesced to form a
threat that was simpler and easier to name—communism. When the Soviet Union demonstrated that
it had the atomic bomb in 1949, its action gave concrete weight to the doctrine of the conservative
movement in the United States at that time. Many
who might not otherwise have been concerned suddenly embraced the fear that unless the United
States became more vigilant, it would not be safe
from, at the least, Communist subversion and spying and, at worst, a Communist takeover.
With the second red scare, the federal government moved into action. The House Un-American
612

Activities Committee (HUAC) had been established in 1938 as a temporary committee, but in
1945 it was made permanent and given great budgetary latitude to investigate Communist propaganda and membership. At the local level, many
states, including Illinois, Ohio, Massachusetts, New
Jersey, Arizona, New Hampshire, Oklahoma, and
Michigan, established comparable entities, sometimes called “little HUACs.” California’s little
HUAC was perhaps the longest running, publishing
its reports into the 1970s.
Washington State’s Joint Legislative Fact-Finding
Committee on Un-American Activities, headed up
by the avid anticommunist Albert Canwell, was created to investigate any organization with Communist
members. The Canwell Committee held hearings to
determine Communist leadership of labor organizations such as the Washington Pension Union, and
other targets as diverse as the state university and
the Seattle Repertory Playhouse. These activities
were typical of all the little HUACs, as their goal was
to disarm the red menace through exposure.
Another measure popular with the state and federal governments was the loyalty oath. In 1947,
President Harry S. Truman instituted a loyalty program for federal employees. The federal loyalty
program consisted of an investigation of each
employee, usually conducted by the Civil Service
Commission, which could include an examination
of any files held by any government agency, including those of the FBI, military intelligence, HUAC,
local law enforcement, and schools. Once charged
with disloyalty, an employee would be entitled to a
hearing, at which the local Loyalty Review Board
would recommend removal from the job or not, as
they deemed appropriate. Refusal to participate in
any phase of the program was considered evidence
of disloyalty. Many states, including New York,
Michigan, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, and the
territory of Hawaii, followed suit. Particularly popular on the local level were loyalty oaths for teachers. Perhaps the most active controversy was in California, when, in 1949, the Board of Regents of the
University of California instituted a loyalty oath
requirement for all university employees. Many faculty and staff refused to sign as a matter of princi-

Red Scare

ple, finding the requirement to be a violation of
academic freedom, and many were summarily dismissed from their jobs. Such loyalty legislation is
still on the books in some states. In Georgia, for
example, the Sedition and Subversive Activities Act
of 1953 still requires all state government job applicants to fill out a state security questionnaire/loyalty
oath form. Every state employee working more
than thirty days in Oklahoma must sign a loyalty
oath, as well.
Anticommunist legislation passed during or near
the red scare years included the Smith Act of 1940,
making it illegal to advocate the overthrow of the
government by force; the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947,
which had a provision requiring an affidavit from all
labor union officials attesting to a noncommunist
stance; the Internal Security Act of 1950, requiring
Communist organizations and their members to
register with authorities; and the Communist Control Act of 1954, disallowing Communist candidates
for elective office. The Senate Internal Security
Subcommittee established in 1951 went after university professors, organizations, and government
officials, particularly diplomats.
While there was an active Communist Party and
there was authentic Soviet espionage in the United
States during the second red scare, the threat of the
former and the extent of the latter were highly exaggerated. In recent years many documents from the
Soviet archives have become available and many U.S.
government documents from the era have been
declassified. In 1995, for example, the National
Security Agency (NSA) declassified the work of the
Venona Project, which had been examining encrypted Soviet diplomatic communications since
1943. According to the NSA, U.S. Army Signal Intelligence analysts ultimately decrypted more than
2,000 messages, most of which are now accessible to
the public. Researchers have gleaned from this and
other material specifics regarding an active Soviet
espionage program. The red scare, however, must be
understood as a phenomenon existing apart from
that reality, because of those accused by McCarthy or
investigated by the HUAC and the little HUACs, few
were actively promoting communism, and even
fewer were actually spies. The individuals and parts

of the federal government that were aware of the
actual participants and their level of activity in the
Soviet espionage program were not the people and
agencies that were the governmental voices of the
red scare.
The Cost of the Red Scares
All of the formal government activity helped maintain the general climate of fear and distrust out of
which it was generated. In the first scare, the result
of the exercise of governmental vigor was the deportation of many aliens; in the second, many citizens
were blacklisted and many lives and careers ruined.
With both red scares, there continues to be disagreement among scholars as to whether public
opinion drove the government to its vigorous response, or whether the government incited public
opinion. In either case, in spite of grueling interrogations, elaborate investigations, the involvement of
many people at all levels of government, and seemingly limitless financial resources and administrative support, no definitive evidence was found supporting the kind of conspiracy feared. Eventually
both red scares lost momentum as their cheerleaders discredited themselves in various ways and the
majority of people came to value peace, stability,
and their own civil liberties over constant vigilance
against an unquantifiable and unsubstantiated
enemy.
Jan Voogd
See also: Anticommunism; House Un-American
Activities Committee; Industrial Workers of the
World; McCarthy, Joseph; Red Summer of 1919;
Venona.
References
Heale, M. J. 1998. McCarthy’s Americans: Red
Scare Politics in State and Nation 1935–1965.
London: Macmillan Press.
Kornweibel, Theodore. 1998. “Seeing Red”: Federal
Campaigns against Black Militancy, 1919–1925.
Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University
Press.
Murray, Robert K. 1955. Red Scare: A Study of
National Hysteria, 1919–1920. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
New York State Legislature. 1920. Joint Legislative
Committee to Investigate Seditious Activities.
Revolutionary Radicalism: Its History, Purpose

613

Red Summer of 1919

and Tactics with an Exposition and Discussion of
the Steps Being Taken and Required to Curb It,
Being the Report of the Joint Legislative
Committee Investigating Seditious Activities,
Filed April 24, 1920, in the Senate of the State of
New York. Albany: J. B. Lyon.
Palmer, A. Mitchell, Attorney General. 1919.
Investigation Activities of the Department of
Justice. 66th Cong., 1st sess. S. Doc. 153, Vol. 12.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Schmidt, Regin. 2000. Red Scare: FBI and the
Origins of Anticommunism in the United States,
1919–1943. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum
Press.
U.S. House. 1920. Committee on Rules. Attorney
General A. Mitchell Palmer on Charges Made
against the Department of Justice by Louis F. Post
and Others. Hearings before the Committee on
Rules, House of Representatives. 66th Cong., 2d
sess. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.

Red Summer of 1919
In the long summer of 1919, from May to October,
an unusual pattern of white mob violence swept
across the United States. As the world had begun to
recover from the years of World War I, there was a
great deal of social unrest in the United States.
Among the general population there were class and
race tensions. Among governmental officials there
were political tensions and turf wars as departments
tried to justify their existence in the postwar economy. The first “red scare” was inflamed by Attorney
General A. Mitchell Palmer, while labor unions went
on strike, and a series of letter bombs were mailed to
prominent government figures.
It was in this climate that at least twenty-seven
incidents of white mob violence erupted. Often
referred to as “race riots,” these incidents were scattered throughout the continental United States, in
locations that varied from major cities like Chicago,
Illinois, and Washington, D.C., to smaller cities such
as Omaha, Nebraska, and Knoxville, Tennessee, to
rural areas like Longview, Texas, and Elaine,
Arkansas. Representative Leonidas C. Dyer’s AntiLynching Bill, introduced in the House in May of
1920, lists the riots as Bisbee, Arizona; Elaine, Ar614

kansas; New London, Connecticut; Wilmington,
Delaware; Washington, D.C.; Blakely, Georgia;
Dublin, Georgia; Millen, Georgia; Putnam County,
Georgia; Bloomington, Illinois; Chicago, Illinois (2);
Corbin, Kentucky; Homer, Louisiana; New Orleans,
Louisiana; Annapolis, Maryland; Baltimore, Maryland (2); Omaha, Nebraska; New York City; Syracuse,
New York; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Charleston,
South Carolina; Knoxville, Tennessee; Memphis,
Tennessee; Longview, Texas; Port Arthur, Texas; and
Norfolk, Virginia. More than 100 people were
reported killed, and more than 1,500 people injured.
These incidents differed in several ways from the
long-standing traditional practice of lynching: the
perpetrators of the action were not just a small group
of adult male vigilantes, but included a wide range of
townspeople, male and female, adults and youths;
their target was not a specific person, but rather the
local black community in general; and the black community in many cases fought back, to a level
unprecedented at that time. James Weldon Johnson
called it the “red summer.” And while many people
suspected a conspiracy at work, there was as much
disagreement about the nature of the conspiracy as
there has been disagreement about whether Johnson
meant “red” as in blood or “red” as in Bolshevik.
One of the most popular theories favored by government officials to explain the violence was that it
was the work of a well-coordinated group of German
agitators. This theory fed into, or was fed by, the red
scare active at that time. The belief was that these
agitators, perhaps with the help of the Industrial
Workers of the World (IWW), used carefully trained
“black Bolsheviks” to incite their brethren to riotous
provocation. In spite of much federal money and
personnel spent to investigate this theory, it was
never substantiated (Kornweibel).
A similar but alternate theory popular with the
government was that the IWW or organized labor
was behind the activity. The theories varied, depending on the local politics. In many areas of the North,
industries had encouraged black migration as a
source of cheap labor and, when necessary, these
industries used nonunionized blacks as strikebreakers. In such a setting, the theory was common that
organized labor was coordinating and inciting the

Red Summer of 1919

Mounted police round up African Americans and escort them to a safety zone during the Chicago Race Riot of 1919.
(Bettman/Corbis)

white mob violence to frighten or stymie the effectiveness of the black strikebreakers. The converse
theory was found in communities where the white
workers were not unionized, and the belief was that
the IWW was motivating an insurgent black community to fight back against the white mobs. Authorities
were never able to substantiate any of the theories.
The American Protective League (APL) is implicated by another theory. The APL was a national
volunteer organization with the informal imprimatur
of the federal government. It served a watchdog role
in the United States during World War I. These local
bands of white men, full of nationalistic fervor,

would watch the skies for German bombers and
turn in their neighbors for any gesture deemed antiAmerican. They did work for the government, on a
volunteer basis, that government agencies would not
have been able to do either for lack of personnel and
other resources or for issues of accountability. APL
records document many incidents of accusation and
investigation, with some cases ending up in trial and
jail time for citizens who had committed such
“offenses” as speaking German, having too much
sugar, or refusing to buy Liberty Bonds. The APL
enjoyed an unusual status, for while it was funded by
contributions from corporations and businesses, it
615

Red Summer of 1919

had the explicit logistical support and guidance of
the Bureau of Investigation (the precursor to the
FBI) (Jensen). Once the war was over, however, the
federal government insisted the organization disband, and it appeared to do so, although very reluctantly. In many of the locations of red summer
white-mob violence, there had been active APL
chapters, and because the people participating in
these mobs were often of the same demographic
composition and nationalistic temperament as those
who had formerly been American Protective League
members, a case has been made that a causal relationship exists, but research into this theory is scant.
Records of individuals’ participation in mob action is
virtually nonexistent, even in cases where a murder
trial or other court cases followed, so a definitive link
between any individual’s membership in the APL
and participation in a red summer riot is elusive.
“Bossism” is the cornerstone of another conspiracy
theory encircling some of the red summer riots, particularly the ones in Chicago, Omaha, and Longview.
This theory holds that the force behind a riot was a
political “boss” who bribed, paid, or otherwise motivated a band of agitators to lead a malleable mob to
racial violence. For decades in Omaha, for example,
a powerful boss, Tom Dennison, controlled the mayoral office, and through it, the rest of the city, before
and after, but not during, the year 1919. In October
of that year, in the waning days of the red summer, a
white mob burned down the brand-new courthouse
and fought the sheriff’s department to take a black
man, accused of assaulting a white woman, from the
jail. The crowd hanged the man and burned his
corpse. When the mayor had tried to stop them, they
tried to hang him, too. The theory is that Dennison
had hired the men who incited the mob’s violence, in
order to kill, or at the very least discredit, the mayor.
While this theory has not been proved or disproved,
the following year a Dennison man was elected
mayor. The federal government investigating this
incident was unable to support its own theory that
the IWW was behind the riot.
In attempting to explain a cause for the riots in
1919, the general practice of the authorities seemed
to be to look first at the black people involved. If
they had fought back at the white mob, the cause of
616

the riot was believed to be black Bolsheviks or the
IWW. If the black people had not fought back
against their attackers, or were grievously outnumbered or outfought, the blame was put on organized
labor or German agitators. For the most part, the
riots were not investigated thoroughly, and this is
certainly true of the phenomenon as a whole. An
exception to this is the Chicago riot, for which the
Chicago Commission on Race Relations was formed
and assigned to investigate. The commission did
publish an extensive study of the incident and the
factors leading up to it. Also, at the time of the riots,
the National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People (NAACP) did at great risk send its
own investigators to some of the riot locations to
interview people and report back. In the years since
the red summer, the Chicago riot, the Knoxville riot,
and the violence in Elaine, Arkansas, have been the
most studied by scholars.
The violence of the red summer abated gradually
as winter arrived in 1919, and while lynching was
not completely stopped for a number of years, and
isolated rioting occurred sporadically throughout
the rest of the century, there has not been another
such epidemic of rioting since. While the various
conspiracy theories associated with the red summer
have never been proved or disproved, the generally
accepted analysis, for now, is that an overall climate
of instability and unrest allowed tensions of various
types, based in local issues, to manifest in patterns
of extreme group violence.
Jan Voogd
See also: Anticommunism; German Americans and
World War I; Industrial Workers of the World; Red
Scare.
References
Chicago Commission on Race Relations. 1922. The
Negro in Chicago: A Study of Race Relations and
a Race Riot. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago.
Jensen, Joan M. 1968. The Price of Vigilance.
Chicago, IL: Rand McNally Co.
Kornweibel, Theodore. 1998. “Seeing Red”: Federal
Campaigns against Black Militancy, 1919–1925.
Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University
Press.
Palmer, A. Mitchell, Attorney General. 1919.
Investigation Activities of the Department of

Regulator Movement

Justice. 66th Cong., 1st sess. S. Doc. 153. Vol 12.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Tuttle, William M. 1985. Race Riot: Chicago in the
Red Summer of 1919. New York: Atheneum.

Regulator Movement
The frontiers of early America were notoriously hard
to control. While states, nations, and tribes fought
epic battles, agricultural communities removed
from the cities of the eastern seaboard found themselves caught in a sweeping economic and political
transformation. In an effort to defend themselves
and assert their rights against what they saw as a
conspiracy of the eastern elite, backcountry homesteaders and squatters formed regulator groups—
extralegal organizations designed to provide local
order and defend the interests of the community
against both internal and external threats. As the
regulator movement grew, governors, merchants,
and soldiers began to see frontiersfolk as a threat to
the stability of the frontier, and thereby to American
order as a whole. As the eighteenth century progressed, European settlement pressed westward
and wars opened new lands to settlement, prompting eastern elites to expand their political and economic hold on the profitable American backcountry.
These attempts fueled rural communities’ fears of a
plot to deprive farmers of their rights to freehold
land and self-governance. Backcountry inhabitants
tended to view reinvigorated tax collection, expansion of capitalist ideas of land value, and the consolidation of distant centers of political power as direct
threats to their liberties and homesteads. Eastern
proprietors and merchants, they argued, conspired
to increase their own wealth and power at the
expense of their fellow subjects. While this conflict
paused and shifted in various ways through the political upheavals of the American Revolution, the core
conflict remained consistent throughout the majority of the eighteenth century.
In response to what they perceived as a growing
autocratic threat, local committees, militia units, and
other groups of organized frontiersfolk took the law
into their own hands in newly aggressive ways. These

groups formed the backbone of a regulator movement that, while disjointed in places, collectively
used both passive resistance and open force of arms
to defend their rights. While the activities of groups
in the regulator movement proved predominantly
peaceful, media attention at the time and historians
since have tended to focus on the violent manifestations of this conflict. Some of these notable flash
points were, in chronological order, the New Jersey
antiproprietary movement (c.1667–1755), the New
York anti-rent movement (c.1753–1766), the “Paxton
Boys” Regulation (c.1763–1773), the North Carolina
Regulation (c.1764–1771), the South Carolina Regulation (c.1767–1769), the “Green Mountain Boys”
movement (c.1770–1784), Shays’ Rebellion (c.1780–
1787), the Whiskey Rebellion (c.1780–1794), Fries’
Rebellion (c.1799), and the resistance of Maine’s
“Liberty Boys” (c.1790–1810).
Whether punishing vagrants, killing Native
Americans, or resisting the established government,
these groups shared common methods, ideals, and
sometimes personnel. Centering their arguments in
common-law traditions of local governance and
property ownership, regulators claimed rights to
land and property that stood in direct contrast to the
deeded and surveyed claims of distant capitalists.
Agrarian essayist William Manning summed up a
common regulator argument in The Key of Liberty
(1799): “Labor is the sole parent of all property . . .
therefore no person can possess property without
laboring, unless he gets it by force or craft, fraud or
fortune, out of the earnings of others” (Merrill and
Wilentz, 135–136). This philosophy, which placed
property rights firmly in the hands of those white
men who physically worked the land, pitted regulators against an array of speculators, surveyors,
Native Americans, and magistrates. Political and
economic power, regulators argued, should lie in
the hands of white male heads of households, not
distant governments or deed holders.
Regulators’ assertions of white male power
equally threatened outsiders without gainful employment, surveyors, tax collectors, and local elites
who sought to enforce the law of colonial, state, or
federal authorities. While, in keeping with longstanding British traditions of popular protest, regu617

Report from Iron Mountain

latory violence generally focused on destruction of
property, in the racially charged atmosphere of the
eighteenth-century frontier vigilante attacks on
indigenous people, massacres, and massive organized jailbreaks for the perpetrators of such violent
crimes also characterized the resistance of many
regulators. Native Americans were particularly targeted as competing landholders (without legitimacy, as indigenous traditions of land use did not
conform to regulators’ definitions of labor and
improvement) and threats to homestead security
during the waves of “Indian wars” that swept the
West through the mid-eighteenth into the nineteenth centuries.
The specific frontier conditions that spurred regulator activity waned with General “Mad” Anthony
Wayne’s crushing victory over a Shawnee-led Native
American coalition at the Battle of Fallen Timbers
in 1794. With the frontier effectively “opened” for
American settlement, some pressure lifted from
western settlements, slowing the need for organized
resistance. Regulator actions and philosophies, however, lingered on, later informing southern vigilantism in the wake of Reconstruction and the latenineteenth-century Populist movement. Traces of
regulator language and action continue as part of
U.S. culture and conspiracy theory in both left- and
right-wing, violent and nonviolent radicalism—
influencing, for example, the Granger movement,
the protest movement against the Vietnam War, and
the late-twentieth-century militia movement.
James Carrott
See also: Militias; Populism; Shays’ Rebellion;
Whiskey Rebellion.
References
Brown, Richard Maxwell. 1977. “Back Country
Rebellions and the Homestead Ethic in America,
1740–1799.” In Tradition, Conflict, and
Modernization: Perspectives on the American
Revolution, ed. Richard Maxwell Brown and Don
E. Fehrenbacher. New York: Academic Press.
Countryman, Edward. 1976. “ ‘Out of the Bounds of
the Law’: Northern Land Rioters in the
Eighteenth Century.” In The American
Revolution: Explorations in the History of
American Radicalism, ed. Alfred Young. DeKalb:
Northern Illinois University Press.

618

Kay, Marvin L. Michael. 1976. “The North Carolina
Regulation, 1766–1776: A Class Conflict.” In The
American Revolution: Explorations in the History
of American Radicalism, ed. Alfred Young.
DeKalb: Northern Illinois University Press.
McConville, Brendan. 1999. These Daring
Disturbers of the Public Peace: The Struggle for
Property and Power in Early New Jersey. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.
Merrill, Michael, and Sean Wilentz, eds. 1993. The
Key of Liberty: The Life and Democratic Writings
of William Manning, “A Laborer,” 1747–1814.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Taylor, Alan. 1990. Liberty Men and Great
Proprietors: The Revolutionary Settlement on the
Maine Frontier, 1760–1820. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press.

Report from Iron Mountain
Report from Iron Mountain (1967) was originally
published as if it were a secret government document, supposedly spirited out from inside the
military-industrial complex. In fact, the book was an
elaborate and brilliant publishing hoax orchestrated
by left-liberal critics of U.S. cold war policies, who
saw the U.S. government as favoring the arms race
at the expense of a healthy domestic social welfare
economy. It was written by Leonard C. Lewin as a
parody of the rhetoric and analysis of cold-war era
think tanks such as the Hudson Institute that supported a strong military establishment.
The hoax was concocted by a group of writers that
included Lewin, Victor Navasky, E. L. Doctorow,
Richard Lingeman, and Marvin Kitman. Originally,
the idea was for the participants in the hoax to write
articles as if they had seen a secret report that had
been suppressed by the government. Lewin successfully argued that it made more sense to write an
actual report on which to base comments. The
upper echelons of the publisher, Dial Press, were
aware that the book was a hoax, but the sales department was not informed, and was told to market the
book as a work of nonfiction. The book proved so
popular that it went into multiple printings.
In introductory material to Report from Iron
Mountain, Lewin states that the report was drafted
by a high-level government commission that held

RICO

meetings at a secret underground facility called
Iron Mountain, said to be located in New York
State. Lewin claims that the report was provided to
him by a pseudonymous John Doe, described as a
social science professor at a large university in the
Midwest. Following his introduction, Lewin reproduces the transcript of an “interview” with Doe
where details of the Iron Mountain meetings are
discussed. Doe tells Lewin he attended the meetings of the Special Study Group at Iron Mountain,
but developed a minority position that led him to
make the report public through Lewin.
The “report” itself reviews the relationship of
the economic health of the United States to periods of war or preparation for war as opposed to
periods of peace. It concludes that a semipermanent state of war or some other aggressive ritualized form of public combat is beneficial to the
economy, and should become the conscious
(although secret) policy of U.S. ruling elites until
acceptable alternatives can be found. It proposes
the establishment of a War/Peace Research Agency
to explore future options that will guarantee the
economic and political survival of the society.
Although there was immediate speculation that
Report from Iron Mountain was a hoax, the book
was such a skillful parody that it also prompted serious discussions in reputable publications ranging
from daily newspapers to scholarly journals. Some
of the original group involved in the hoax encouraged this debate while not revealing their knowledge of the book’s origins. It was not until 1972 that
Lewin officially admitted he was the author in an
article in the New York Times Book Review.
After the book went out of print, right-wing
groups, including Noontide Press, publishing affiliate of the Institute for Historical Review (IHR),
circulated several bootleg editions of the book.
Originally founded by Willis Carto of Liberty
Lobby fame, IHR was primarily devoted to challenging the accepted facts of the Nazi genocide of
Jews. IHR and other right-wing groups would note
that the book was called a hoax, but in a sly way that
suggested it might actually be true. This “decide for
yourself” approach acknowledges the hoax while
suggesting the text is nonetheless a model guide

that explains the logic behind world events.
Offended by this turn of events, Lewin successfully
filed suit to block distribution of the bootleg copies.
In 1996 the Free Press issued a new edition of the
book with a new preface and several appendices that
discussed how the hoax was perpetrated and included some of the early responses to its publication.
Nevertheless, some admirers of the book across the
political spectrum continue to insist it is an actual
government document. Discussion of the Report
from Iron Mountain, including the debate as to
whether or not it is a hoax, continues on the Internet.
Chip Berlet
See also: Liberty Lobby.
Reference
Lewin, Leonard C. [1967] 1996. Report from Iron
Mountain: On the Possibility and Desirability of
Peace. New York: The Free Press.

RICO
The Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organization statute (18 U.S.C. Sections 161–168), part of
the Organized Crime Control Act of 1970, was
designed to create an expansive legal definition of
criminal conspiracy that would aid the authorities in
their fight against organized crime. Usually referred
to as RICO, this statute has become the most powerful tool federal law enforcement has ever had in its
fight against organized crime. The statute includes a
vague definition of racketeering that incorporates a
list of crimes traditionally excluded from federal
jurisdiction. The list includes such crimes as murder,
gambling, arson, robbery, and extortion. With this
new tool and expanded federal jurisdiction, federal
law enforcement and prosecutors have used RICO
to convict and incarcerate more than a thousand
organized crime figures by the end of the 1990s.
Traditionally, law enforcement tried to use the
standard conspiracy laws and statutes to convict organized crime members. Thus, prosecutors had to
prove an agreement within the group (two or more)
and one overt act regarding a specific crime. Because
of the often varied and isolated criminal activities of
an organized crime group, this was difficult. Under
RICO, instead of focusing on specific crimes and the
619

Robertson, Pat

related conspiracy, law enforcement can focus on
patterns of racketeering by an organized crime
group. That is, with RICO it is now illegal to belong
to a group or “enterprise” that displays a pattern of
racketeering even if another member of the enterprise is committing the illegal activities. To meet the
“pattern of racketeering” requirements under RICO,
only two crimes within a ten-year period need to be
committed, with at least one of the crimes since
1970.
RICO includes both a criminal and a civil
penalty. The maximum criminal penalty includes a
$25,000 fine and imprisonment for twenty years,
with all properties and interest related to the racketeering violation forfeited to the government. Civil
penalties include treble damages and the attorney’s
fee awarded to the successful plaintiff.
In an expansion of RICO, the U.S. Supreme Court
ruled in 1994 that there did not have to be an economic motive for the illegal activities to fall under
RICO. Using the civil section of RICO in 1998, two
abortion clinics sued and received treble damages
from antiabortion leaders. This noneconomic expansion of RICO was also the basis for the April 2001
U.S. district judge’s decision allowing the Los Angeles Police Department to be sued as a racketeering
enterprise.
Common criticisms of the RICO statute include
its overreaching scope. Individuals who may be involved in illegal activities, even when it is evident
that they are not involved in organized crime, are
still being prosecuted under RICO. Another criticism is that RICO allows an individual’s assets to be
frozen before trial, which often forces defendants to
plead guilty in an effort to save their business and
savings. RICO also brings with it a negative characterization of the defendant as an organized crime
figure.
RICO has been and continues to be the most effective legal tool ever brought against organized crime.
Through the expanded list of racketeering crimes and
the enterprise conspiracy clause, federal law enforcement agencies and prosecutors are now succeeding
where in the past they had failed in both convictions
and sentencing of organized crime figures.
Kenneth L. Mullen

620

See also: Mafia.
References
Abadinsky, Howard. 2000. Organized Crime. 6th ed.
Belmont, CA: Wadworth/Thomas Learning.
Luccaro, Daniel, et al. 2001. “Racketeer Influenced
and Corrupt Organizations: 16th Annual Survey
of White Collar Crime.” American Law Review
38: 1211–1219.
Lyman, Michael D., and Gary W. Potter. 1999.
Organized Crime. 2d ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall.

Robertson, Pat
A prominent figure on the religious Right, Pat
Robertson, with his brand of conspiracy-infused politics, reached a wide audience in his bid for the presidency in 1988 and with the success of his controversial book The New World Order, which has been
accused of antisemitism. The son of a senator,
Robertson purchased a Virginia television station in
1960, marking the beginnings of the Christian
Broadcasting Network, one of the most important
elements of the burgeoning evangelical media that
was to become so important in the latter part of the
twentieth century. When evangelicals also established the Christian Right at the end of the 1970s,
Robertson played a relatively minor role, but the
subsequent decline of its leading organization, the
Moral Majority, and the impending end of the Reagan years brought him to prominence following his
decision to pursue the 1988 Republican presidential
nomination. While he was unsuccessful, an important effect of his campaign was the creation the following year of the Christian Coalition. Concentrating
much of its energies on opposition to abortion and
homosexuality, the Coalition rapidly became a key
component of the Republican Party and although it
was to decline in the late 1990s (and Robertson to
resign from its presidency in 2001), during the early
years of the Clinton administration it was a central
force in the resurgence of conservatism.
Shortly after the creation of the coalition,
Robertson published a book in which he declared
that in calling for a “New World Order,” President
Bush was unknowingly carrying out the mission of a
vast, global satanic conspiracy. In arguing this,

Robison, John

Robinson claimed that a conspiratorial elite could
be traced back to the eighteenth century, when a
secret society, the Illuminati, had plotted the
French Revolution. In the nineteenth century Illuminism had mutated into Marxism, while in the
twentieth century the Bolshevik seizure of power in
Russia had been secretly funded by European financiers. In later years, he argued, much of the work
of the conspiracy was carried out by such organizations as the Council on Foreign Relations and the
Trilateral Commission.
Initially little noticed outside the evangelical
milieu, The New World Order began to attract attention following a front-page attack in a 1994 issue of
the prestigious New York Review of Books. Authored
by Michael Lind, a former conservative, it argued
that Robertson’s work was not the usual brand of
evangelical Protestant theology but originated
instead in “the underground literature of far-right
populism.” He was supported by another former
conservative, Jacob Heilbrunn, who convincingly
demonstrated that Robertson had relied on material
by the early-twentieth-century antisemitic conspiracist, Nesta Webster. The New York Review’s attack
drew angry replies from Robertson and other conservatives. Subsequently, Robertson blamed a
research assistant for introducing Webster’s material
into his work and he continued to deny any suggestion that he held antisemitic views.
A closer examination of both Robertson’s book
and the writings of his critics shines a critical light on
both sides of the argument. Robertson, while rightly
pointing out his long record of support for Israel,
had nonetheless produced a book that linked the
Illuminati to the Rothschild family. Conversely,
Lind, who had suggested Robertson’s writings were
“far more bizarre and sinister” than the conspiracist
writings of the John Birch Society, missed both the
Society’s praise for Robertson’s book and the strong
links between what Robertson argued and what the
Society had long believed. Having itself drawn on
Webster’s work, the Society had also been accused
of antisemitism, and while both have denounced
claims that conspiratorial forces are Jewish in origin,
it is understandable that critics should take them to
be antisemitic. The situation is, however, more com-

plicated, because conspiratorial claims that the hidden rulers of history are bankers, or Masons, or
extraterrestrials might often be motivated by a
racist view, but is not always necessarily so.
If Robertson has had the misfortune to have his
conspiracy theory attacked more for what it did not
say than what it did, he has also been accused of
being a secret adherent of the New World Order,
rather than an opponent. In the 1980s, one conspiracy text with a considerable impact upon evangelicals
was Constance Cumbey’s The Hidden Dangers of the
Rainbow, which, like Robertson’s later volume, saw
the New Age movement as part of Satan’s attack on
Christianity. In a later book, A Planned Deception,
Cumbey suggested that Robertson’s announcement
that he intended to provide live coverage of the Second Coming fitted well with a supposed New Age
plan to launch a false Christ figure upon the world.
Martin Durham
See also: Antisemitism; Illuminati; New World
Order.
References
Boston, Robert. 1996. The Most Dangerous Man in
America? Pat Robertson and the Rise of the
Christian Coalition. Amherst, MA: Prometheus
Books.
Cumbey, Constance E. 1985. A Planned Deception:
The Staging of a New Age ‘‘Messiah.” Detroit,
MI: Pointe Publishers.
Durham, Martin. 2000. The Christian Right, the Far
Right, and the Boundaries of American
Conservatism. Manchester, England: Manchester
University Press.
Lind, Michael. 1996. Up from Conservatism. New
York: Free Press.
Robertson, Pat. 1991. The New World Order. Dallas,
TX: Word Publishing.

Robison, John
A professor of natural philosophy at the University of
Edinburgh in Scotland, John Robison (1739–1805)
was a distinguished scientist and writer. He was also
author of Proofs of a Conspiracy against All the Religions and Governments of Europe Carried On in the
Secret Meetings of the Freemasons, Illuminati, and
Reading Societies, Collected from Good Authorities
621

Robison, John

(1797), which alleged that the Illuminati (a secret
society originally founded in Bavaria in 1776) were
behind many of the major events of the day, and the
French Revolution in particular. Robison’s exposé
was widely circulated and much discussed in the conspiratorial climate of the late 1790s (not least among
New England leaders fearful of foreign threats to the
fledgling American republic), and, remarkably, it is
still much cited and remains in print today.
The son of a Scottish merchant, Robison was
born in 1739 and attended the University of Glasgow while in his teens. After serving as tutor to the
son of Admiral Sir Charles Knowles, he was next
commissioned to conduct sea trials of the newly
invented nautical chronometer, before accompanying Sir Charles to Russia. Returning to Scotland,
Robison took up the chair of natural philosophy
(what would now be termed physics) at the University of Edinburgh in 1773. He developed a reputation as a distinguished scientist, and was invited to
write entries for the third edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica on topics such as electricity,
fluid dynamics, and magnetism. In 1783 he was
elected general secretary of the newly formed Royal
Society of Edinburgh (an organization, like its London counterpart, devoted to furthering scientific
knowledge).
Like many leading figures in eighteenth-century
society Robison was a Mason, and Proofs of a Conspiracy was careful to make a distinction between
the respectable, charitable activities of British
freemasons, and the dangers of what the author saw
as an immoral, godless, and secretive, corrupt version
of masonry that had flourished on the continent. In
his lengthy book, Robison alleged that the Illuminati
had merely gone underground after they had been
disbanded by the Elector of Bavaria in 1787, and
had then plotted to overthrow the Christian religion
and all established governments. He argued that the
French Revolution could only be explained by such
a theory, since the eruption of revolutionary agitation right across the country could not have been the
result of a spontaneous uprising, but must have been
the result of a secret, concerted plan. His proof of
the connection between the banned German secret

622

society and the leaders of the French Revolution was
some rather slim evidence of an association between
some middle-ranking Illuminati and Mirabeau and
Talleyrand, French freemasons who went on to
become important politicians in the 1790s.
Robison’s book also warned that cells of the suppressed Illuminati had been set up in America.
Along with Augustin de Barruel’s four-volume
exposé of the dangerous reach of freemasonry (the
first two voumes of which just beat Proofs of a Conspiracy to the press), Robison’s book caused a stir in
the fevered climate of the late 1790s in America.
His claims were widely reported in the press, and
influential figures such as Jedidiah Morse expanded
on Robison’s theory in sermons and speeches. The
scare stories about the dangers of an underground
Illuminati conspiracy plotting to undermine America’s liberties fed into the Federalist agitation that
resulted in the Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798.
Although Robison’s book fell into obscurity once
the immediate political climate changed in the later
nineteenth century, it has continued to be cited as a
major source on the existence of an all-powerful
ultrasecretive conspiracy ever since. Since the 1960s
the work has become a mainstay of, on the one
hand, right-wing diatribes against the power of
shadowy, power-hungry, atheistic globalists (the Illuminati in this view become forerunners of Communism) and, on the hand, anti-authoritarian versions
of conspiracy theory that create an account of a longrunning, semimystical conspiracy of the elite that its
unmaskers believe dates back to beyond even the
eighteenth century.
Peter Knight, with Jeffrey L. Pasley
See also: Alien and Sedition Acts; Barruel, Abbé;
Freemasonry; Illuminati.
References
Lipset, Seymour Martin, and Earl Raab. 1970. The
Politics of Unreason: Right-Wing Extremism in
America, 1790–1970. New York: Harper and Row.
Roberts, J. M. 1972. Mythology of the Secret
Societies. London: Secker and Warburg.
Stauffer, Vernon. [1918] 1967. New England and
the Bavarian Illuminati. New York: Russell &
Russell.

Rockefeller Family

Rockefeller Family
Associated with almost every conspiracy theory
from the era of the Populists to the modern Trilateral Commission, Bilderbergers, and the Council
on Foreign Relations, the Rockefeller family holds
a unique place in U.S. conspiracy history. Even the
powerful banker J. P. Morgan and steel magnate
Andrew Carnegie have not been the center of conspiracy theories as have focused on John D. Rockefeller, the founder of Standard Oil Company, although one conspiracy website refers to Andrew
Carnegie—at one time, the richest man in the
world—as a “Rockefeller stooge.”
Rockefeller (1839–1937) was born in Richford,
New York, and began working as a bookkeeper at
age sixteen. Seven years later, he joined entrepreneur Henry Flagler and inventor Samuel Andrews
to begin refining crude petroleum. The three incorporated the firm as Standard Oil Company in 1870,
bringing in John’s brother William to join the company. Rockefeller emphasized cost-cutting and
demanded that the “common man” have cheap
kerosene, employing chemists to develop better
methods of refining and to search out new ways to
use petroleum by-products. Although Rockefeller
bought out other refiners, creating for Standard Oil
a near-monopoly position, consumer prices on
kerosene plummeted—and continued to do so until
the time of the Standard Oil breakup in 1911.
The claims leveled against John D. Rockefeller
and his descendants are so many and diverse as to
defy easy categorization. Populist groups tended to
ignore Rockefeller personally and attack his connections with the large (in their view, monopolistic)
railroads. The critique of the railroads involved traditional concerns with price-fixing and monopolies,
but also contained a criticism of “long-haul/shorthaul” price differentiation, in which large shippers,
such as Rockefeller, received rebates not extended
to those shipping over shorter distances. Other
reform groups and “muckrakers” such as Ida Tarbell maintained that Rockefeller unduly pushed
smaller competitors out of business and used ruthless pricing tactics in an attempt to “corner the market.” Rockefeller’s new mechanism for controlling

multiple companies, called the trust, was viewed as
fundamentally undemocratic and, with the Sherman Anti-Trust Act of 1890, was outlawed. That act,
ironically, had the effect of driving companies from
the inefficient trust structure into much more efficient vertical combinations, which in turn
increased—rather than decreased—their power.
A tither to his church all his life, Rockefeller had a
fortune of nearly $1 billion, and gave away charitable
contributions totaling $550 million through the Rockefeller Foundation, the General Education Board,
the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research, and
the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial. These
philanthropic organizations became the source of yet
other conspiracy theories. The Institute for Medical
Research, for example, has been accused of conducting a massive propaganda campaign to eliminate nondrug “holistic” treatments for diseases, in order to
increase profits for the “Rockefeller-Farben combine.” In this theory, Rockefeller, through the Institute, hoodwinked the medical profession into adopting drug therapies by shaping the treatment of
medical research in the universities.
In 1952, Emanuel Josephson published Rockefeller, “Internationalist”: The Man Who Misrules
the World, one of the first book-length conspiracy
attacks on the Rockefellers. Josephson claimed that
the Rockefeller family sought “to control all necessities from the time they are produced until they are
consumed” (Josephson, 20). The foundations, in
Josephson’s view, were only attempts to remain free
of taxation, allowing the family to dominate U.S.
Steel, Westinghouse, Republic Iron and Steel, and
dozens of other U.S. companies. Not only did the
family own stock in these companies, but they also,
through marriage and appointments, dominated
the boards of other important companies. Winthrop
Aldrich, chairman of Chase National Bank, was
John D. Rockefeller’s brother-in-law through Rockefeller’s marriage to the daughter of Senator Nelson
Aldrich—one of the creators of the Federal
Reserve System.
According to the theory, Rockefeller, Morgan, Paul
Warburg, and other “internationalists” sought to use
the Federal Reserve and the newly imposed income

623

Roosevelt, Franklin Delano

tax to control the U.S. economy and to then implement a socialist/Bolshevik agenda. The classic conspiracy book, None Dare Call It Conspiracy (1971)
by Gary Allen and Larry Abraham, place Rockefeller,
Warburg, and Morgan, as well as National City president Frank Vanderlip and financiers Bernard
Baruch and Jacob Schiff, at the center of a world conspiracy through the Council on Foreign Relations
(CFR), which is directed, in turn, by the Rothschilds.
Through the CFR, the Rockefellers controlled not
only Standard Oil, U.S. Steel, Eastman Kodak, Xerox,
IBM, and Firestone, but also dominated the media
by owning or influencing NBC, CBS, Time magazine,
Life magazine, and all the major newspapers and
publishing houses. Like most theories, Allen and
Abraham only imply or infer a Rockefeller presence
in this and other conspiracy networks.
Not only did the Rockefellers play prominent—
some would say “shadow”—roles in business, but
they were also active in politics. John, Jr.’s son, Nelson Aldrich Rockefeller, worked in Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal administration, then held a number of appointed positions in the Eisenhower
administration or on public commissions. He ran
for the Republican nomination for president three
times, and lost, before being named vice-president
after Gerald Ford was sworn in to replace President
Richard Nixon, who resigned. Winthrop Rockefeller, the youngest of John, Jr.’s sons, was elected
governor of Arkansas in 1966.
Through the work of David Rockefeller (b. 1915),
the son of John D. Rockefeller, Jr., and the head of
the Carnegie Endowment for Peace in the 1950s,
the family’s internationalist pursuits continued.
David Rockefeller set up the Trilateral Commission
in 1973 to promote cooperation in international
matters. Through the influence of the CFR and the
Trilateral Commission, the World Bank, and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Rockefeller influence promoted “multilaterialism” and
international lending as a means to destroy national
sovereignty and produce a “one world government.”
The fact that David Rockefeller wrote a 1980 Wall
Street Journal editorial attacking notions that he was
the “mastermind of an international conspiracy”
(Gilmour, 1) only served to convince conspiracy the624

orists even more of his guilt. Instead, theorists
pointed to Rockefeller’s work with President Jimmy
Carter’s national security advisor, Zbigniew Brzezinski, on a white paper dealing with international technology issues as clear evidence of his agenda. Thus,
to the present, the name “Rockefeller” infuses virtually every major conspiracy theory except those dealing with UFOs and the Kennedy assassination.
Larry Schweikart
See also: Bilderbergers; Council on Foreign
Relations; Federal Reserve System; One-World
Government; Trilateral Commission.
References
Carr, Albert Z. 1962. John D. Rockefeller’s Secret
Weapon. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Gilmour, Robert A. 1984. America’s Unknown
Enemy: Beyond Conspiracy. Great Barrington,
MA: American Institute for Economic Research.
Josephson, Emanuel M. 1952. Rockefeller,
“Internationalist”: The Man Who Misrules the
World. New York: Chedney Press.
———. 1968. The “Federal” Reserve Conspiracy
and Rockefellers: Their “Gold Corner.” New York:
Chedney Press.

Roosevelt, Franklin Delano
Franklin Delano Roosevelt was president from 1933
to 1945. He greatly expanded presidential authority,
and his policies infuriated conservatives who saw
them as evidence of a deeper conspiracy to increase
presidential power and undermine the Constitution.
His domestic policy (the “New Deal”) dramatically
increased federal government power in an effort to
end the Great Depression, and his foreign policy
sought cooperation with Stalin in order to deter and
eventually defeat fascist aggression. Conservatives
constructed numerous conspiracy theories around
these policies, since they regarded the New Deal as
despotic and unconstitutional, and cooperation with
Stalin as naïve or treasonous. Conspiracy theorizing
about FDR crested in the 1950s, although attacks on
the New Deal and his foreign policy continue even
today. Conspiracy theories were perhaps inevitable
given FDR’s leadership style: subtle, devious, and
disingenuous, he told different people different
things, and hated having his discussions docu-

Roosevelt, Franklin Delano

mented. The historical record is thus unclear enough
to permit widely divergent interpretations, including
views of FDR as the master manipulator.
FDR was born in 1882 and educated at Groton,
Harvard, and Columbia. A lifelong Democrat, FDR
entered New York State’s senate in 1910. Appointed
assistant secretary of the navy under President Wilson, FDR favored U.S. involvement in World War I
and the League of Nations. FDR ran for vicepresident in 1920, when the Republicans won a
crushing victory. Polio permanently paralyzed his
legs in 1921, but undaunted, he spent the 1920s
involved in internationalist causes and Democratic
politics. He became governor of New York in 1929,
was elected president in 1932, and was then
reelected three times, and died in April 1945.
In the 1930s, leftist conspiracy theorists feared
that Wall Street financiers and industrialists would
sponsor a fascist coup. Some observers considered
that Wall Street (or the Mafia) was behind the February 1933 attack that narrowly missed FDR and
mortally wounded Chicago mayor Anton Cermak,
but most considered the perpetrator, Giuseppe Zangara, a “lone nut.” Communist journalist John L.
Spivak claimed that in 1934 Wall Street plotted to
supersede FDR with a fascist dictatorship under
marine general Smedley Butler. The plot collapsed
when Butler betrayed the cabal to Congress—
though when forced to testify, the alleged conspirators naturally denied Butler’s accusations. Spivak’s
contention that “Jewish finance” was behind the
Butler affair—and was financing Hitler—casts considerable doubt on the credibility of his assertions.
Some leftists held that Wall Street was behind the
far-right Father Charles Coughlin, the Liberty
League, and a supposed coup plot by General Douglas MacArthur. Many Marxists, however, considered Wall Street opposition to FDR a sham. Marxists viewed FDR as Wall Street’s lackey, since the
New Deal co-opted liberalism, defused revolutionary
discontent, and “saved capitalism” for Wall Street.
Conservatives believed that the New Deal was a
socialist conspiracy to “collectivize America” and
tighten federal control of the economy, education,
and the individual. Ever since the 1930s, moderates
and extremists have regarded the New Deal as the

origin of pernicious “big government.” Extremists,
however, considered that the Soviets and their traitors inside the U.S. government excessively influenced FDR’s policies. In their view, FDR was either
a naïve dupe (or a willing tool) of communism. The
John Birch Society believed FDR was the creature of
the “Insiders,” a group of financiers who control the
United States through front organizations like the
Federal Reserve and Council on Foreign Relations.
The Insiders wanted to cooperate with the Soviet
Union to create a one-world government, and FDR
supposedly aided the Soviets to advance this goal.
In the 1950s, Senator Joseph McCarthy agitated
against an “immense” Communist conspiracy to
infiltrate the Roosevelt and Truman administrations.
For decades thereafter, leftists successfully argued
that McCarthy was a demagogue who manufactured
evidence and slandered innocents for partisan and
cold war purposes. They viewed McCarthyism, not
Communism, as the real danger to the United
States. In the 1990s, however, declassified National
Security Agency intercepts (“Venona”) and KGB
archives proved that hundreds of U.S. traitors under
Soviet control penetrated the Roosevelt administration. These traitors infiltrated the White House,
State Department, Treasury Department, and the
Manhattan Project, among other organizations.
Venona did not prove all of McCarthy’s claims, and
provided no support for his wild assertions that Roosevelt was a traitor or abetted communism, but
McCarthy’s many false charges obscured the truth
and greatly hindered anticommunism by allowing
real traitors to portray themselves as innocent victims of McCarthyite hysteria. Venona proved that
Communist traitors were a real danger, and that
they transferred important information and technology to the Soviets.
The Soviets bought U.S. technology as well as
stealing it. From 1929 to 1941, U.S. assistance dramatically enhanced Soviet industrial development
and completely modernized Soviet heavy industry.
American technology and training contributed to
over two-thirds of the major Soviet industrial enterprises built in the 1930s. Far-right theorists attributed this aid to Communist infiltration of the U.S.
government, to blind Wall Street greed, and to the
625

Roosevelt, Franklin Delano

President Roosevelt signs declaration of war. (Library of
Congress)

Insiders’ long-term plan for a one-world government. A more compelling explanation was the evident need to strengthen the Soviet Union against
future German and Japanese aggression. This need
became especially urgent after Japan invaded
Manchuria in 1931 and Hitler assumed power in
1933. From 1941 to 1945, Soviet arms produced in
U.S.–modernized factories destroyed Hitler’s
Wehrmacht, proving the wisdom of these technology
transfers.
U.S. entry into World War II provided fertile
ground for conspiracy theory. “Revisionists” argued
that “establishment” histories were a whitewash
that needed revision. They asserted that after war
erupted in Europe, Roosevelt sought pretexts for
U.S. participation. He subverted neutrality legislation, provided money and equipment to Britain,
626

and fought an undeclared war against German submarines in the Atlantic. Revisionists claimed that
when Hitler refused to take the bait, FDR maneuvered Japan into attacking Pearl Harbor.
In 1947, George Morgenstern wrote the “classic”
Pearl Harbor work of revisionist history. Since then,
other revisionists like Stinnett have added details to
his argument. Revisionists claimed that, in 1941,
FDR embargoed Japanese oil and made intolerable
diplomatic demands in order to force Japan to
attack. FDR knew the Pacific Fleet was vulnerable
in Pearl Harbor, and knew—through decoded Japanese transmissions—where and when Japan would
attack. FDR, the revisionists assert, withheld vital
intelligence from commanders in Honolulu, because an alert there would cause Japan to cancel the
attack. Sacrificing the “tethered goat” at Pearl Harbor brought the United States into the war and
ensured wartime unity. Afterwards, Roosevelt successfully deflected blame for the attack from himself
onto the commanders in Hawaii.
Revisionists were ignored or reviled in the 1940s
and 1950s, since they cast doubt on the prevailing
internationalist foreign policy consensus and attacked
FDR, a liberal icon. In 1962, Roberta Wohlstetter
produced a counterargument to revisionism. She
believed that conflicting “signals” and “noise” confused U.S. intelligence analysts before Pearl Harbor
(“signals” were evidence of Japanese intentions to
attack Pearl Harbor, and “noise” was evidence of
Japanese plans to attack elsewhere). Most historians
accepted her thesis that America’s prewar intelligence apparatus was too poorly organized to put the
right information together in time to warn Honolulu.
Unfortunately, many commentators focused not on
the facts, but on personally attacking the revisionists,
scorning them as right-wing paranoid extremists who
hated the New Deal. Interestingly, in the 1970s, revisionism gained currency on the Left, after Vietnam
and Watergate increased distrust of the government.
Some leftists today accept the Pearl Harbor revisionist argument because they believe that analogously,
President Bush knew the September 11 attacks were
coming and let them happen.
FDR’s wartime diplomacy provided additional
conspiracy fodder. Rightists argued that FDR “sold

Roswell

out” China and Eastern Europe into “Communist
enslavement” at the February 1945 Yalta Conference. Most rightists attributed this to the pernicious
influence of traitors like Alger Hiss and Harry Hopkins, although some accused FDR of deliberate
appeasement. This fixation on Yalta was odd, since
FDR actually made the crucial decisions on Eastern Europe at the 1943 Teheran Conference. Historian Warren Kimball convincingly showed that
FDR’s wartime diplomacy reflected not treason or
naïveté, but a consistent strategy designed to
achieve a peaceful postwar world order.
FDR died of a cerebral hemorrhage, but apparently Stalin suspected assassination. Fletcher
Prouty (the former Air Force officer and Pentagon
insider who was the model for Mr. X in Oliver
Stone’s film, JFK) alleged that Stalin told FDR’s
son, Elliott Roosevelt, that British intelligence poisoned FDR. Some rightists believed that Stalin poisoned FDR, although right-wing claims that FDR
was Stalin’s dupe should lead to the conclusion that
Stalin had no motive to kill FDR.
James D. Perry
See also: Atomic Secrets; Council on Foreign
Relations; John Birch Society; McCarthy, Joseph;
National Security Agency; Pearl Harbor; Venona;
Wall Street; Yalta Conference.
References
Abraham, Larry. 1985. Call It Conspiracy. Wauna,
WA: Double A Publications.
Beard, Charles. 1948. President Roosevelt and the
Coming of the War, 1941. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Haynes, John Earl, and Harvey Klehr. 1999. Venona.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Kimball, Warren. 1991. The Juggler. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Morgenstern, George. 1947. Pearl Harbor. New
York: Devin Adair Company.
Spivak, John. 1935. “Wall Street’s Fascist Conspiracy.”
New Masses, 29 January and 5 February.
Stinnett, Robert. 2000. Day of Deceit. New York:
Free Press.
Sutton, Anthony. 1971. Western Technology and
Soviet Economic Development, 1930–1945.
Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution.
Weinstein, Allen, and Alexander Vassiliev. 1999. The
Haunted Wood: Soviet Espionage in America.
New York: Random House.

Wohlstetter, Roberta. 1962. Pearl Harbor: Warning
and Decision. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.

Roswell
After mysterious events in 1947, a small town in
New Mexico became synonymous with visitors from
outer space, UFOs, alien autopsies, and government
cover-ups. The “Roswell Crash” and ensuing “government cover-up” have become a staple in modern
conspiracy theories and have moved almost to the
level of a modern myth. Several movies have made
reference to Roswell—most recently Independence
Day (dir. Roland Emmerich, 1996)—and a television show, Roswell, has been developed around the
events that allegedly took place that summer. While
there is some agreement on the general details, even
the specific dates, locations, and comments by the
major participants are a matter of hot debate. The
“Roswell Incident” has not only pitted UFO “believers” against “skeptics,” but has generated charges
and countercharges by various writers within the
UFO “believer” community itself, and has resulted
in no fewer than three major theories (and several
sub-theories) of what happened at Roswell.
At the time leading up to the alleged incident,
Americans had already started to report flying
objects at an increasing rate. In early June 1947 a
private pilot flying west from Boise, Idaho, radioed
that he had spotted dish- or saucer-shaped aircraft,
and a rash of UFO sightings ensued. But the events
at Roswell added an entirely new perspective on the
sightings—physical evidence of a crash.
On 14 June, a local New Mexico rancher, William
W. “Mac” Brazel, who was making the rounds of the
J. B. Foster Ranch (which he operated), found
debris, but thought it was unimportant. It had odd
writing on it, almost like hieroglyphics. The debris
was strewn over several hundred yards. Brazel and
his son both saw it, but Brazel, who “did not pay
much attention to it,” did not deal with it for about
three weeks. When he returned, on 4 July, Brazel
loaded some of the debris in his truck, and upon a
visit to the nearby town of Corona, he heard of several sightings of “flying discs.” (Apparently, he heard
627

Roswell

about these discs on Saturday 5 July, although again
any date in the timeline poses difficulties for ufologists.) He did not report the findings to authorities,
and did not immediately go to Roswell—some 75
miles away—but waited until his regular trip to the
town on Monday. Versions differ on whom he
showed the wreckage to, and who was allowed to
handle it. When he finally arrived in Roswell, Brazel
told the sheriff, George Wilcox, about the debris.
Wilcox contacted the authorities at Roswell Army
Air Field, where Major Jesse A. Marcel (the 509th
Bomb Group’s intelligence officer) and a captain
accompanied Brazel back to his home. Brazel
showed the officers the debris, which filled a few
feed sacks and did not weigh more than five pounds.
The major tried briefly to fit some of the pieces
together into a kite.
On 8 July, after Marcel had returned, Walter G.
Haut, the public information officer at the airfield,
provided a press release in which he used the terms
“flying disc” and “flying object,” but not “flying
saucer.” Meanwhile, the debris was boxed up and
flown to Fort Worth, Texas, where Brigadier General
Roger M. Ramey of the Eighth Army Air Force took
authority over it. The same evening as Haut issued
his press release, Ramey gave an interview to a radio
station in which he stated that the wreckage was the
remains of a radar reflector and a special weather
balloon used to carry it aloft. He even invited
reporters to inspect the debris. The following day,
newspapers had headlines proclaiming, “Flying Disc
Explained.”
Unknown to Brazel, Marcel, Haut, and probably
even Ramey, in 1946 the Joint Chiefs of Staff had
approved a secret project (MOGUL) to use high-altitude balloons to carry radar and other measurement
equipment aloft so as to determine the behavior of
atomic fallout over the U.S. mainland. Charles B.
Moore, the Balloon Group’s project engineer, in
1993 began to speak publicly about the previously
classified government program. Moore and his group
had used radar reflectors that they had attached to
the balloons by “scotch-like tape that had . . . flowerlike designs” on the back. The group released a balloon train on 4 June 1947 and lost contact with several balloons, one of which was on a direct line for
628

Mac Brazel’s ranch. (Indeed, on 10 July, the Alamogordo News carried an article on these tests, though
not the specifics of them.) Reports of new “UFO”
sightings soared in the wake of the news articles—
some 800 reports of UFOs were received by the government in June and July of 1947 alone—but no
reporters claimed any “stonewalling” or cover-up.
Nevertheless, fifty years after the “crash,” Philip
Corso in The Day after Roswell alleged that the
Army Air Force engaged in “suppression” as early as
8 July. One problem with Corso’s claim is that FBI
documents showed that the FBI had already been
informed that the wreckage was from a balloon.
In 1948, a newspaper editor in Aztec, New Mexico, wrote a fictional column about a crashed saucer
involving “little green men,” and the myth was
born. Two years later, a Denver disc jockey at radio
station KMYR claimed to have seen the men from
“Venus.” That was followed by a best-selling book,
Behind the Flying Saucers, the same year. Nevertheless, the lack of physical evidence led UFO
“believers” to drop the Roswell incident from their
regular discussions for more than two decades.
It resurfaced near the end of the 1970s when
Leonard H. Stringfield published a number of articles claiming that the wreckage and alien bodies
were recovered by the military. Stringfield also provided, as anthropologist Charles Ziegler points out,
a remarkable paradox of the UFO “true-believers”:
the stories were essentially impossible to “prove” as
untrue, and thus, if not discredited they were true,
and if discredited, they were also true because they
“proved” a government cover-up. But the first real
revival of the Roswell story appeared in 1980 when
occult writer Charles Berlitz joined ufologist
William L. Moore to write The Roswell Incident.
This version had the spaceship getting hit by lightning and traveling to the Plains of San Agustin
before it crashed. At that point, the military showed
up and sanitized the site, taking the bodies. But the
military missed the initial parts of the ship, discarded 100 miles back because of the lightning, forcing a cover story. The Berlitz-Moore version had
gained widespread approval from the UFO community because of the cover-up aspects, and in 1984,
Moore and television producer Jaime Shandera re-

Roswell

ceived an anonymous report supposedly outlining
the existence of a secret government committee,
“Majestic 12” or MJ-12. However, the MJ-12 document painted a much different picture of the events
at Roswell than Berlitz and Moore suggested.
As a result, a second version of the Roswell myth
evolved. In this version, the saucer malfunctioned
and exploded on its own, but north of Roswell Army
Air Field. The crash left four alien bodies that had
ejected, and the army removed all evidence and
spread it to different locations. Meanwhile, the
authenticity of the MJ-12 documents had come into
question, not only by skeptics such as Philip Klass,
but also some within the UFO community itself.
Perhaps coincidentally, a new book, UFO Crash at
Roswell (1991), by Kevin D. Randle and Donald R.
Schmitt, had a scenario that mirrored that of the
disputed MJ-12 documents, even though Randle
and Schmitt tried to distance themselves from that
report. In their version, the UFO touched down on
Brazel’s ranch, then took off before bouncing along
the New Mexico landscape to its final resting place.
The significance of this story is that it added crash
sites, and complicated the story, but brought in a
group of archeologists who claimed to have seen the
bodies.
In 1991, an article exposed as a fraud the MJ-12
document and a subsequent “memo” supposedly
“corroborating” it. The article, written by researchers
who specialized in forensic analysis of documents
and sponsored by a UFO journal, claimed that
William L. Moore was likely the forger of the documents. But while some ufologists abandoned the MJ12 documents, many others claimed that the forgeries only “proved” the government was conspiring to
discredit the entire movement, and claimed that
Moore was a “plant.”
No sooner had the dust settled on the MJ-12
scandal than Stanton Friedman and Don Berliner
published Crash at Corona (1992), which argued
that two crashed saucers were recovered, along
with one alien who was still alive. An internal struggle between conflicting versions of what happened
led Randle and Schmitt to amend some details in
yet another book in 1994, although the basics of
their new story still resembled earlier versions. A

significant variation did appear that year, though, by
Karl Pflock, who had learned of the MOGUL balloon tests, and incorporated them into a crashed
saucer story. When the U.S. Air Force released its
Roswell report a few months later—with photos of
humanlike dolls hung from balloons and parachutes
to test wind drift—the UFO community rejected it
out of hand. Some ufologists wrote articles in UFO
journals analyzing the report.
The most recent work, and the one least likely to
be accepted by the UFO believers, is one issued by
the U.S. government by author James McAndrew,
The Roswell Report: Case Closed (1997). McAndrew produced the evidence on MOGUL and the
parachute-drop dummies, as well as a review of
other government space-related programs of the
era. No doubt, however, other Roswell books are
being prepared at this time.
Writing about the Roswell “crash” has become a
cottage industry, supported in no small part by the
town of Roswell, which has an economic stake in visitors coming to see the site. With the advent of cable
television and inexpensive videotapes, Roswell writers sought to get their stories on screen, spinning off
television exposés such as Alien Autopsy, a “documentary” film that purported to show doctors conducting an autopsy on an extraterrestrial creature.
The classified nature of the balloon trials in
MOGUL, combined with the subscale lifelike dolls,
provided the necessary props for a “cover-up” by the
army: soldiers immediately cordoned off areas and
removed debris and “evidence,” while “bodies” were
taken away. It was not until Curtis Peebles wrote
Watch the Skies! in 1994 that anyone had attempted
to conduct a serious study of the UFO phenomena
and of Roswell.
The Roswell “incident,” which did not emerge as
a hot conspiracy topic until the 1980s, was covered
by the press fairly and objectively at the time,
despite a spate of UFO stories in the major national
papers, when reporters examined the possible phenomenon with inquisitive, but skeptical eyes. Indeed, the government had contributed to the UFO
craze by establishing an office to review and catalog
all “sightings,” and even when incidents were
clearly shown to be natural phenomena, the pres629

Ruby, Jack

ence of such a government office itself seemed to
ufologists to indicate a “cover-up” was in progress.
Since the 1980s, when the UFO community embraced the Roswell incident as a possible visitation of
extraterrestrials, it has evolved into a modern myth.
Roswell scholars Benson Saler, Charles Ziegler, and
Charles B. Moore note that three images of Roswell
have emerged. The first is the public image, which
they label “a case of mistaken identity.” Emerging
mostly through television and the tabloids, the public
image is one of an exposé that reinforces the reality of
UFOs and thus results in a view that extraterrestrial
visitations are real. A second image, the scholarly
image, is necessarily more critical. Scholars have
pointed out that the Roswell stories display a series of
substantive changes involving key events that are
modified or abandoned in later stories. Thus, many of
the major Roswell proponents do not even agree on
the location of the crash or the numbers of “saucers.”
Equally important to scholars is the fact that many of
the pieces of evidence exist in the already public
record under the perfectly logical explanations of the
U.S. Air Force, and thus Ockham’s razor is brought to
bear (i.e., explaining something in the simplest
hypothesis needed to explain that thing). Not unexpectedly, with the “real” evidence of the balloons and
radar reflectors available, the most recent of the
Roswell versions account for both the crash and the
air force radar detector. It is this level—that of scholars lending credence to the idea of a U.S. Air Force
crash—that has prevented it from being accepted by
the public as a legitimate explanation. Whatever
“proof” is offered by the ufologists has involved
changing the rules of evidence in such a way as to
nullify claims of scientific knowledge.
The final image, of course, is the most romantic:
true believers who claim that the government
and/or powerful forces have combined to conceal
the truth. Recent use of the Freedom of Information Act to obtain documents has tied up government resources in providing records of past activities. So far, to the extent that believers seek to
elevate the Roswell incident to the same historical
level as the Titanic, they have failed because the
absence of evidence does not justify such a certitude. The public knows of Roswell mostly through
630

television, a dramatic medium, and the frequent
use of “docudramas” to validate the claims of ufologists has produced a view of Roswell that is onesided and unscientific, but full of drama. It is the
quintessential modern myth and the ultimate cosmic urban legend.
Larry Schweikart
See also: MJ-12; UFOs.
References
Berlitz, Charles, and William L. Moore. 1980. The
Roswell Incident. New York: Grosset and Dunlap.
Corso, Philip J., with William J. Birnes. 1997. The
Day after Roswell. New York: Pocket Books.
Friedman, Stanton T., and Don Berliner. 1992.
Crash at Corona: The United States Military
Retrieval and Cover-up of a UFO. New York:
Paragon House.
Klass, Philip J. “Crash of the Crashed Saucer
Claim.” Skeptical Inquirer 16 (1): 71–75.
McAndrew, James. 1997. The Roswell Report: Case
Closed. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Peebles, Curtis. 1994. Watch the Skies! A Chronicle
of the Flying Saucer Myth. Washington, DC:
Smithsonian Institution Press.
Randle, Kevin D., and Donald R. Schmitt. 1991.
UFO Crash at Roswell. New York: Avon.
———. 1994. The Truth about the UFO Crash at
Roswell. New York: Avon.
Saler, Benson, Charles A. Ziegler, and Charles B.
Moore. 1997. UFO Crash at Roswell: The Genesis
of a Modern Myth. Washington, DC: Smithsonian
Institution Press.

Ruby, Jack
On 24 November 1963, at 11:21 A.M., Jack Ruby
fatally shot Lee Harvey Oswald, eliminating the
need for a trial for John F. Kennedy’s alleged assassin, and thereby entering the annals of conspiracy
theory. To many Americans, Ruby’s act seemed
instant evidence that Kennedy’s assassination was
the work of a conspiracy.
Ruby claimed he shot Oswald in order to prevent
Jackie Kennedy from having to participate in a
lengthy trial. He also noted his ire at the famous
anti-Kennedy ad placed in the Dallas Morning
News on the day of the assassination. Ruby feared
the ad, signed by right-wing activist Bernard Weiss-

Ruby, Jack

man, would cause the public to blame the assassination on the Jews—to Ruby, Weissman’s name
sounded “Jewish.”
Ruby’s activities between the time of the assassination and the Oswald shooting are well documented. Seth Kantor, a former Dallas journalist then
working as a White House correspondent, claimed to
have seen Ruby at Parkland Hospital shortly after the
assassination. Ruby then closed his nightclub, the
Carousel Club, for the weekend, and spent the rest
of the day running around the city talking about the
assassination. He bought sandwiches for the police,
bringing them to radio station KLIF where he
learned the police had already eaten. He visited the
police station anyway, talked with Kathy Kay, an
employee of his at the Carousel, and stopped by the
Dallas Times Herald. At 4:30 A.M on 24 November,
he and his roommate, George Senator, took photographs of an “Impeach Earl Warren” billboard near a
Dallas freeway. Later that morning, Ruby drove
downtown to the Western Union office and wired
$25 to Karen Carlin, another Carousel employee, at
11:17 A.M. Four minutes later, he headed to the
nearby Dallas Police station, where Oswald was at
that moment being transferred to the Dallas jail.
Moving quickly through the crowd, Ruby shot
Oswald once in the stomach.
Ruby’s Biography
Ruby was born Jack Rubenstein on 25 March 1911,
in Chicago. His family was Orthodox Jewish, and
Ruby’s Jewish identity emerged early on, as he participated in breaking up American Nazi Bund
marches in Chicago. Dropping out of school after
the sixth grade, Ruby spent his youth fighting and
hustling on the streets. He was placed in a foster
home for eighteen months beginning in 1923. In
1933, he left for California, returning to Chicago in
1937. Between 1937 and 1943 he was union organizer for Scrap Iron Junk Handler Local 20467 in
Chicago; the union’s books were later seized by the
state of Illinois because of connections with organized crime (it has often been claimed that Ruby
was more widely involved with organized crime in
Chicago). He enlisted in the army air force in 1943,
and was discharged in 1946. He moved to Dallas in

Dallas night club owner Jack Ruby stands for a
portrait at the Dallas police station. Ruby shot
and killed Lee Harvey Oswald, the accused
assassin of President Kennedy. (Corbis)

1947, to help his sister Eva run a nightclub. That
same year, he changed his name to Jack Ruby.
Between 1947 and 1963, Ruby ran a string of Dallas nightclubs. Eva’s Singapore Club became the
Silver Spur in 1953, and Ruby invested in the Vegas
Club, which he partly owned until his arrest. In
1959, Ruby acquired an interest in the Sovereign
Club, on Commerce Street in downtown Dallas.
When Ruby’s friend Ralph Paul became his partner,
they changed the Sovereign’s name and format to a
striptease joint called the Carousel Club.
After his arrest for the Oswald killing, Ruby was
tried and convicted by Judge Joe B. Brown. San
Francisco lawyer Melvin Belli defended him, making
the case that Ruby suffered from psychomotor
epilepsy, which affected his judgment. After the
631

Ruby Ridge

guilty verdict was returned on 14 March 1964,
Ruby’s lawyers began an appeal, which culminated in
Brown’s removal from the case. On 24 June 1966, the
Texas Court of Criminal Appeals reversed Ruby’s
death sentence and granted him a change of venue.
While this appeal continued, Ruby died of cancer on
3 January 1967, expiring in the same Parkland Hospital where Kennedy was taken. Though Ruby’s
claim that he was injected with cancer is medically
impossible, his Parkland doctor asserted that if his
cancer had been detected earlier by Dallas jail physician John W. Callahan, it could have been treated,
prolonging Ruby’s life.
Ruby and Kennedy Conspiracy Theories
Up until his death, Ruby offered flickering assertions
that he was involved in a conspiracy, asserting in a television interview that his entire story had not been
told. Ruby figures in every conceivable assassination
conspiracy theory. In particular, his connections with
organized crime have helped produce theories
describing collusion between the Mafia and Cuban
exiles, the CIA, or right-wing Texas militants. Ruby’s
alleged Mafia ties begin with his youth in Chicago,
where he supposedly ran errands for Al Capone, and
continue through his union organizer work in the
same city. Many of Ruby’s associates in Dallas are
also linked to organized crime. For example, Paul
Roland Jones, an associate of the Chicago Mafia who
offered to bribe the Dallas Police Department, frequented Ruby’s Singapore Club during the late
1940s. In addition to these links, Ruby’s activity in
the months before the assassination also indicates an
organized crime connection. For example, according
to Bell Telephone records, Ruby’s phone activity
increased dramatically during this period, and many
of these calls are to figures connected with organized
crime. Ruby explained these calls as resulting from
troubles with the American Guild of Variety Artists,
the union to which Carousel Club performers
belonged. Ruby also made several documented trips
to Cuba between 1959 and 1963, supposedly on
Mafia gun-running or narcotics errands.
In addition to the Mafia connection, conspiracy
researchers point to Ruby’s testimony before the

632

Warren Commission, in which, among other
strange notes, he repeatedly asks to be taken to
Washington because his life is in danger. Ruby’s
involvement in a conspiracy also surfaces elsewhere
in the hearings. In his testimony, Marguerite
Oswald’s lawyer Mark Lane infamously claimed
that Ruby met with Weissman at the Carousel Club,
along with J. D. Tippit, the policeman whom
Oswald shot shortly after the assassination. Lane’s
reference to Tippit carried weight because of
Ruby’s close association with the Dallas Police
Department. For example, he regularly hosted Dallas Police Department members at the Carousel
Club, and sent policemen gifts of whiskey at Christmas. With fifty-one policemen guarding Oswald,
researchers often assume that Ruby must have had
inside help to fire such a close shot.
Andrew Strombeck
See also: Kennedy, John F., Assassination of;
Oswald, Lee Harvey; Warren Commission Report.
References
Adelson, Alan. 1988. The Ruby-Oswald Affair.
Seattle, WA: Romar Books.
Scheim, David. 1988. Contract on America: The
Mafia Murder of President John F. Kennedy. New
York: Shapolsky Publishers, Inc.
Wills, Gary, and Ovid Demaris. 1967. Jack Ruby.
New York: The New American Library.

Ruby Ridge
Along with the siege at Waco, the Ruby Ridge incident has become one of the most prominent events
for conspiracy-minded opponents of the government
and the “New World Order.” In August 1992, U.S.
marshals engaged in a weeklong standoff with the
family of Randall J. Weaver at the Weavers’ mountainside home in northern Idaho, now popularly
known as Ruby Ridge. The raid resulted in the
deaths of Weaver’s wife Vicki, his son Samuel, and
federal agent William Degan. A number of conspiracy theories cluster around the Ruby Ridge incident.
On one side, the Weavers believed that Zionists had
taken control in the United States and planned to
institute a tyrannous one-world government. In the

Ruby Ridge

wake of the siege, Randy Weaver has insisted that
federal officials conspired to hide the truth of their
own conduct prior to and during the siege. On the
other side, federal authorities believed that Randy
Weaver was involved in a conspiracy by white
supremacist groups to commit terrorist acts and subvert the U.S. government. And, finally, the events at
Ruby Ridge confirmed the suspicions among many
right-wing extremists that a Jewish-controlled U.S.
government intends to disarm patriotic U.S. citizens.
Randy Weaver
Randy Weaver grew up in a small town in southwestern Iowa. Two years after graduating from high
school in 1966, he enlisted in the army and underwent Special Forces training with the Green Berets,
but never went to Vietnam. In 1971, he married
Vicki Jordison. The Weavers became interested in
biblical prophecy after reading Hal Lindsey’s The
Late Great Planet Earth (1970), which interpreted
the Old Testament through events in the modern
world. The Weavers quickly came to believe in the
literal truth of the Bible and, through their readings,
developed the belief that the Old Testament predicted many of the global conflicts in the modern
world, such as the rise of communism. They also
came to believe that the forces of evil—controlled by
Communists and Jewish bankers—were preparing
to invade the United States and usher in the Last
Days. In 1983, the Weavers moved to northern
Idaho with their two children, Sara and Samuel, in
order to separate themselves from modern society
and await the Tribulation. They built their own home
on the mountain, stockpiled food and other provisions, and trained their children in the use of
firearms. While in Idaho, the Weavers came into
contact with many people who held beliefs similar to
their own: white supremacists, survivalists, and
members of the religious movement called Christian
Identity. But even in rural Idaho, which in the 1980s
was home to some of the most notorious white
supremacist groups in U.S. history, the Weavers’
beliefs were iconoclastic. They considered themselves separatists, not supremacists, and lived their
lives according to the strict rules of the Old Testa-

ment and other arcane religious writings, such as the
biblical apocrypha. Although they made friends with
members of groups like the Aryan Nations, the
Weavers never officially joined any organized group.
They did, however, attend the Aryan Congress meetings at the Aryan Nations compound in Hayden
Lake, Idaho. Their attendance at the Aryan Congress was significant for two reasons. First, in the
mid-1980s, the American West, and Idaho in particular, was a principal concern for both the FBI and
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms
(BATF). In 1983 and 1984, an offshoot of the Aryan
Nations calling itself the Bruders Schweigen, or the
Order, launched a wave of crime that included bank
robbery, an armored car heist in Seattle that netted
a half million dollars, and the murder of Alan Berg,
a prominent talk-radio host in Denver. By 1985, following tips from informants and a series of raids, federal authorities had successfully captured and convicted twenty-two members of the Order. Following
that success, FBI and BATF investigations of Aryan
Nations were ongoing. The Weavers’ attendance at
the Aryan Congress was also significant because it
was there, in 1986, that Randy Weaver befriended
Kenneth Fadeley, an undercover BATF informant
calling himself Gus Magisono. Three years later, in
October 1989, Weaver agreed to sell Fadeley two
sawn-off shotguns and soon after, federal agents
threatened to arrest Weaver unless he agreed to become an informant himself. When Weaver refused,
a grand jury indicted him on federal weapons violations. At his indictment hearing, Weaver’s trial date
was set for 19 February 1992. On 7 February of that
year, Weaver was sent a notice by the U.S. attorney
that his trial date had been changed to 20 March,
when in fact it had been changed to 20 February.
The Weavers maintained that this and other dealings
they had with law enforcement officials were deliberate acts of deception, further proof that they had
been targeted for their beliefs and purposely set up
as part of a government conspiracy.
The Siege
After Weaver failed to appear for his appointed court
date, federal agents began what would eventually be

633

Ruby Ridge

an eighteen-month surveillance of the Weaver cabin.
During this time, they developed a threat assessment
of Weaver that a subsequent investigation by a Senate subcommittee determined was deeply flawed.
That assessment included the charges that Weaver
was a neo-Nazi, that he had been convicted of engaging in white supremacist activities, that he was a suspect in a number of bank robberies meant to finance
antigovernment terrorism, that the Weaver home
was protected by booby-traps and explosives, that
Weaver had made threats on the life of the president,
and that he was to be treated as extremely dangerous.
In fact, Weaver had never been convicted or charged
with any crime prior to his arrest on the federal gun
charge and the subcommittee determined that the
threat assessment was greatly exaggerated. Nevertheless, based on these assessments, the BATF deployed
its Special Operations Group (SOG) to help bring
Weaver in. On 21 August 1992, a group of federal
marshals, under heavy camouflage, approached the
Weaver cabin. At the same time, fourteen-year-old
Samuel Weaver and a family friend named Kevin
Harris were out hunting with the family dog, Stryker.
When the dog approached the agents, it was shot,
setting off a flurry of gunfire that wounded Harris
and killed Samuel Weaver and one of the agents,
William Degan. The following day, an FBI sniper,
Lon Horiuchi, fired two shots into the Weaver cabin,
one of which wounded Randy Weaver. The second
shot, which traveled through a window of the Weaver
cabin, hit Vicki Weaver in the face as she held her
infant daughter Elisheba. Vicki was killed instantly.
Following the sniper fire, the remaining members of
the Weaver family continued to resist surrender.
Finally, after another week of negotiations and the
intervention of Christian Patriot leader Bo Gritz,
Randy Weaver agreed to turn himself over to authorities. Weaver and Harris were charged with murder
in the death of Marshal Degan and several other
felonies, including assault and conspiracy to subvert
the United States government. Represented by
celebrity defense attorney Gerry Spence, both men
were acquitted of all charges and, in addition, a jury
found that Weaver’s original arrest on a weapons violation was the result of entrapment. Weaver was convicted only of a failure to appear for trial.
634

Aftermath
Following the trial, Weaver filed a wrongful death
suit in the killing of Vicki, which was settled out of
court in 1994 for over $3 million. In 1995, a Senate
Subcommittee on Terrorism, Technology, and Government Information held public hearings to
address allegations of government misconduct. At
issue were questions regarding FBI and BATF handling of the investigation of Randy Weaver, the rules
of engagement used by SOG during the raid, and
allegations of a subsequent cover-up during the
trial. In each case, the committee determined that
the government had acted irresponsibly and, in the
case of the rules of engagement, unconstitutionally.
Among their findings were FBI orders that instructed federal snipers to shoot on sight any member of the Weaver family seen to be carrying a
weapon, despite the fact that only Randy was
charged with a crime. The committee also concluded that Horiuchi’s second shot, which killed
Vicki Weaver, was unjustified under FBI policy and
the United States Constitution. Further, the committee found that federal officials attempted to
cover up their misconduct in several ways: by failing
to follow proper investigative protocols, failing to
provide or delaying the release of relevant documents for the court, and showing favoritism when
reviewing the actions of friends and colleagues. For
many on the extreme Right, the findings of the Senate subcommittee provided evidence of a conspiracy that they had long suspected. According to Timothy McVeigh’s own statements, the treatment of
the Weavers in the Ruby Ridge incident, coupled
with similar government handling of the Branch
Davidian siege in Waco, Texas, played a significant
role in his decision to bomb a federal building in
Oklahoma City. A decade later, Ruby Ridge continues to anger antigovernment activists: in June 2001,
a federal appeals court ruled that Lon Horiuchi
could stand trial on an involuntary manslaughter
charge for the killing of Vicki Weaver. But the following week, an Idaho prosecutor declined to pursue the case, citing insufficient evidence, and
dropped the charge. Randy Weaver lives with his
remaining children in Iowa.
Jeff Insko

Ruby Ridge

See also: Aryan Nations; Christian Identity; OneWorld Government; New World Order; Waco; ZOG.
References
Walter, Jess. 1995. Every Knee Shall Bow: The Truth
and Tragedy of Ruby Ridge and the Randy
Weaver Family. New York: Regan Books.

Weaver, Randy and Sara. 1998. The Federal Siege on
Ruby Ridge: In Our Own Words. Marion, MT:
Ruby Ridge, Inc.
U.S. Senate. 1996. Ruby Ridge: Report of the
Subcommittee on Terrorism, Technology, and
Government Information of the Senate Committee
on the Judiciary. Collingdale, PA: Diane Publishing.

635

S
Sacco and Vanzetti
Anarchists Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti
were sentenced to death in July 1921 for the murders of Frederick Parmenter and Alessandro
Berardelli, employees of the Slater and Merrill Shoe
Company who were killed by robbers during a payroll holdup in South Braintree, Massachusetts, in
April 1920. Among others implicated in a conspiracy
to frame Sacco and Vanzetti for crimes they did not
commit were the district attorney of Plymouth and
Norfolk Counties, Frederick G. Katzmann, the
assistant district attorney, Harold Williams, and Walter Ripley, the foreman of the jury during Sacco’s
and Vanzetti’s trial. Debates regarding the existence
of a conspiracy have focused upon significant flaws
in the testimony of several prosecution eyewitnesses, the dubious quality of evidence offered by
ballistics experts, and the “Medeiros Confession,” in
which a convicted murderer would later admit to
carrying out the killings himself.
Were Sacco and Vanzetti the victims of a conspiracy to frame them for murders they did not commit?
In the febrile political climate marked by outbursts
of “red scares” in the United States during the immediate postwar years, it is certainly safe to say that few
on the U.S. Left were confident that left-wing anarchists like Sacco and Vanzetti would receive a fair
trial. As the postwar U.S. economy went into recession, the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia and a series
of bitter confrontations between employers and
organized workers at home fueled the red scare of
1918–1920, a wave of beatings, arrests, and deporta-

tions whose scale would dwarf the more infamous
McCarthy witch-hunts of the 1950s, and that would
cripple significant constituencies within the U.S. Left
throughout the 1920s. The highly charged political
atmosphere in U.S. cities was intensified in April
1919, with the discovery of an anarchist plot to bomb
a list of prominent public figures, including Attorney
General A. Mitchell Palmer, John D. Rockefeller,
and J. P. Morgan. Whether or not Sacco and Vanzetti
were innocent victims of a conspiracy (Saccos’s guilt
was widely assumed even by members of his own
defense teams, as was Vanzetti’s innocence), the
widespread collusion of the courts in the political
purges of the red scare suggests that once charged
the anarchists stood little chance of acquittal. Prosecuting District Attorney Katzmann became famous
for his closing address to the jury, in which he
implied that a successful conviction of Sacco and
Vanzetti would amount to a patriotic duty well discharged. After the trial, the first of eight eventual
motions for a retrial would cite the jury foreman for
his observation that, guilty or not, the anarchists
“ought to hang anyway.”
Flawed Trial
From its opening on 31 May 1921, the trial of Sacco
and Vanzetti, in Dedham, Massachusetts, was
steeped in controversy. After four days of jury selection, only seven jurors had been selected from a
pool of 500 interviewees. Instructing the local sheriff to round up a further 200 suitable candidates,
Judge Webster Thayer dismissed defense objections
637

Sacco and Vanzetti

Bartolomeo Vanzetti (left) and Nicola Sacco, manacled
together and surrounded by a heavy guard and onlookers,
about to enter the courthouse at Dedham, Massachusetts,
where they will receive the death sentences for a murder
they were convicted of committing in 1920 (photograph
taken in 1927). (Library of Congress)

about the “arbitrary” manner in which the jury had
been assembled. When proceedings finally began, a
number of witnesses for the prosecution offered
testimony that conflicted with statements they had
previously made to the police. Of the seven eyewitnesses who had placed Sacco at or close by the
scene of the murders, no witnesses were consistently sure that they had correctly identified the
defendant, and no one at all was able to testify that
Vanzetti had been present during the shootings.
Sacco’s alibi, placing him in Boston on the day of
the murders, was supported by seven witnesses,
while Vanzetti’s claim that he was selling fish in Plymouth was supported by another six. Despite the
testimony of two defense experts who advised that
none of the bullets fired at the crime scene could
have come from Sacco’s pistol, the jury chose to
638

believe the evidence of a ballistics expert for the
prosecution, who offered the opinion that one of
the bullets was “consistent” with having being fired
by the defendant’s gun (his careful choice of language being seen by some at the time as a deliberate attempt to mislead the jury as to Sacco’s guilt).
From the pool of circumstantial evidence brought
against Vanzetti, the prosecution made much of the
fact that the weapon Vanzetti was carrying when he
was arrested had undergone a similar repair to the
gun carried by the victim Berardelli on the day he
was shot. Documents made public in 1977, however, would show that the weapon found on
Vanzetti was of a different caliber than the one carried by Berardelli.
By mid-June the defense had attempted to
impeach the testimony of one of the prosecution
“eyewitnesses,” on the grounds that a larceny charge
made against him had been dropped as “payment”
for his testimony. By the end of the month another
witness had told the court that the prosecution eyewitness Lola Andrews, who would later retract her
testimony, was unable to identify either of the defendants and had been coerced into doing so by a “government agent.” Following the return of guilty verdicts on both defendants, the eight different motions
for a new trial (the penultimate one made to the
Supreme Court in May 1926) were all refused. The
second of these motions, made in May 1922, raised
the prospect of a serious scandal when it cited the
retraction of one eyewitness’s testimony locating
Sacco at the scene, and accused the assistant district
attorney of leaning on witnesses to fabricate testimony. Two weeks after the Supreme Court decision
a final motion for retrial was filed on the grounds that
a confession by Celestino Medeiros, a Portugese
convict who had himself been imprisoned for murder in the United States, made the convictions of
Sacco and Vanzetti unsafe. Medeiros was a member
of the Morelli Gang, a well-known group of freightcar robbers whom police had originally listed as suspects for the South Braintree murders. Nicola Sacco
and Bartolomeo Vanzetti were executed on 23
August 1927. Celestino Medeiros was executed with
them.
David Holloway

Salem Witch Trials

See also: Alien and Sedition Acts; Anticommunism,
Industrial Workers of the World; McCarthy, Joseph;
Morgan, John Pierpont; Nativism; Red Scare;
Rockefeller Family.
References
Avrich, Paul. 1996. Sacco and Vanzetti. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Denman Frankfurter, Marion, ed. 1997. The Letters
of Sacco and Vanzetti. New York: Penguin.
Young, William, and Edward E. Kaiser. 1985.
Postmortem: New Evidence in the Case of Sacco
and Vanzetti. Amherst, MA: University of
Massachusetts Press.

Salem Witch Trials
The Salem Witch Trials (February to October 1692)
comprise the largest witch-hunt in North American
history. A keynote of the Salem Witch Trials and the
history of their interpretation is conspiracy: secret
plots, involving members of groups perceived to be
conspiring with the devil, and acting covertly to
carry out harmful ends requiring intricate cover-ups.
Background
Of the 150 individuals imprisoned (from 24 towns
and villages), 44 individuals confessed, 20 individuals were executed (19 accused witches hanged; one
man pressed to death), and 4 individuals died in
prison.
The events leading up to the trials center on a
small group of girls from Salem Village (now Danvers, Massachusetts) who met in the home of Rev.
Samuel Parris for stories and fortune-telling with
Tituba, the minister’s Caribbean slave. By January
1692 the minister’s daughter and niece (followed by
the rest of the group) displayed symptoms of
demonic possession. Pressured to name their tormentors, the girls accused Tituba and two others
(Sarah Good and Sarah Osborne). When Tituba
confessed to witchcraft, accused Good and Osborne,
and claimed the existence of other witches, panic
engulfed the Puritan community.
Conspiracy Theories
From the start, the Salem Witch Trials have been
seen through the lens of conspiracy theory. Seven-

teenth-century witnesses interpreted the events as
part of a satanic world takeover. Reflecting this
mindset is Cotton Mather’s Wonders of the Invisible
World (1693), one of the first histories of the trials.
Salem villagers perceived witches, not as isolated
practitioners of the “craft,” but instead as a network
of individuals with links to the upper class and the
colonial center at Boston. Reflecting in part Puritan
millenarian traditions, Salem villagers militarized
their concepts of witch covens. Witches were said to
meet secretly to plot the overthrow of the country
and to set up a new, diabolical form of government.
While this satanic conspiracy theory of Salem was
discredited before the close of the seventeenth century, modern research has uncovered evidence for
the presence of practicing witches in Salem.
A second conspiracy theory of the Salem Witch
Trials centers on the belief that the young girl
accusers were deliberately lying, their motives
being power, attention, even entertainment. In the
nineteenth century, this conspiracy theory became
the standard interpretation. Ranging in ages from
nine to twenty, the group of accusers included Elizabeth Parris, Abigail Williams, Ann Putnam, Jr.,
Mercy Lewis, Mary Walcott, Mary Warren, Sarah
Churchill, Susannah Sheldon, and Elizabeth Hubbard. While the girls were swept along by events
they may not have preconceived, once begun, they
were committed to continuing and to naming fresh
victims to prolong the delusion. While their first
accusations targeted social outcasts, the girls soon
began accusing people from higher stations; according to one rumor, the girls were about to accuse the
wife of Governor Williams Phips, who abruptly dissolved the Court of Oyer and Terminer on 29 October 1692.
A third influential conspiracy theory involving the
Salem Witch Trials proposes a power acting behind
the accusing girls. Proponents of this theory argue
that the girls were guided by a small group of adults
seeking revenge and political gain. The clearest
indicator of adult intervention is the unprecedented
support authorities lent the girls. Ministers and magistrates kept the girls in public view, accepted their
word, and—most importantly—allowed spectral
evidence (evidence based on the actions of specters
639

San Francisco Vigilance Committee

of both the living and the dead seen only by the
accusing girls).
The belief in a conspiracy of adults guiding the
accusing girls relies on competing factions characterizing seventeenth-century Salem, which was
divided geographically and politically into Salem
Town (the seaport) and Salem Village (a small farming community). In Salem Village two factions
struggled for supremacy, one led by the Porter family advocating close ties with the town, and another
group led by the Putnam family fighting for independence. Rev. Parris was aligned with the Putnams, in part because the church at Salem Village
symbolized autonomy from Salem Town.
A sinister pattern begins to emerge, with many of
the accusers belonging to the Putnam faction, and
many of the accused belonging to the Porter faction.
In the households of Thomas Putnam and Samuel
Parris resided five of the nine accusing girls. A total
of eight members of the Putnam clan helped sentence nearly fifty accused witches. All of the accusing girls had direct links to the household of Rev.
Parris, who testified against ten accused witches,
and who beat his slave Tituba to confess to witchcraft, a confession instigating a large-scale witchhunt. While the desire to crush opposition is the
motive in this conspiracy theory, personal interests
also seem to have played a role, such as the desire
for land on the part of Thomas Putnam, and the
desire to salvage an unsuccessful ministry on the
part of Parris.
Another theory containing conspiratorial elements centers on the inherent misogyny of the trials
and their links to the interests of an emerging medical profession. Witch-hunts were part of a larger system of patriarchal control, and the women first
accused in Salem were those (like Bridget Bishop, a
contentious businesswoman married three times)
who deviated from Puritan standards of womanhood. One problem with this theory concerns the
extent to which patriarchy, as a pervasive social system, relies on the intentional collusion of individuals.
More in keeping with a traditional conspiracy theory
is the thesis that the Salem Witch Trials, like other
witch-hunts, were used by a male medical profession
to eliminate competition from midwives. Although it
640

is impossible to provide precise numbers of midwives in Salem, in most households women were
responsible for healing, and thus competed with the
relatively small number of male practitioners. Sarah
Osborne, Ann Pudeator, and Elizabeth Proctor were
all accused of witchcraft in relation to midwife practices, and one of the accusing girls (Elizabeth Hubbard) was a niece of Dr. William Griggs, who incidentally made the first diagnosis of witchcraft in
Salem, claiming the girls were “under an evil hand.”
The trials have bequeathed to the U.S. lexicon—
and the vocabulary of conspiracy theory—a key
term, “witch-hunt,” meaning any attempt to expose
subversive activity, but which is really an attempt to
crush political opposition.
Marcus LiBrizzi
References
Boyer, Paul, and Stephen Nissenbaum. 1974. Salem
Possessed: The Social Origins of Witchcraft.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 1977. Salem Witchcraft Papers. 3 vols. New
York: DaCapo.
Breslaw, Elaine G. 1996. Tituba, Reluctant Witch of
Salem: Devilish Indians and Puritan Fantasies.
New York: New York University Press.
Hansen, Chadwick. 1969. Witchcraft at Salem. New
York: Braziller.
Karlsen, Carol. 1987. Devil in the Shape of a
Woman: Witchcraft in Colonial New England.
New York: Norton.
Lawson, Deodat. [1914] 1959. “A Brief and True
Narrative of Witchcraft at Salem Village.” In
Narratives of the Witchcraft Cases, 1648–1706,
ed. George L. Burr. New York: Barnes.
Mather, Cotton. [1693] 1862. The Wonders of the
Invisible World. Amherst, WI: Amherst Press.
Upham, Charles. [1867] 1991. Salem Witchcraft. 2
vols. Salem, MA: Higginson.
Weisman, Richard. 1984. Witchcraft, Magic, and
Religion in 17th Century Massachusetts. Amherst:
University of Massachusetts Press.

San Francisco Vigilance Committee
Was the San Francisco Vigilance Committee of 1856
an unselfish citizen effort to establish law and order
or was it a cleverly disguised conspiracy to gain political power? Although opinions may differ, it appears

San Francisco Vigilance Committee

that, after disbanding the committee, several of its
members ran for office as Republicans rather than
the party that created the Vigilance Committee to
promote itself.
San Francisco can be seen as a lesson in what
happens when people fail to perform their civic
duties. Many tried “to get rich quick,” neglecting
public affairs, including jury duty, so only those with
an ulterior motive tended to serve on juries. For
example, justice was often perverted when the only
willing jurors were friends of the accused.
On the other hand, a case may be made that partisan politics was the fundamental motivating factor
in San Francisco. With the Whigs defunct, Democrats divided over slavery, and Know-Nothings
offensive to most voters (despite their having elected
Governor J. Neely Johnson in 1855), a vacuum welcomed a new party, the Republicans. All that those
with political ambitions needed was to find a cause,
and the issue of law and order provided that.
Life was turbulent in San Francisco during the
gold rush and early days of independence from
Mexico. Without strong government, gangs roamed
the streets, demanded free drinks, and abused the
Latino community. On 15 July 1849, when a bunch
of ruffians launched a raid against the Chilean
neighborhood, 230 men retaliated. They took the
law into their own hands, formed a special police
force, arrested the gang, elected two new judges,
and appointed a new district attorney. Two years
later, after law and order was again neglected, 700
men banded together as the Vigilance Committee
of 1851 to supplement local law enforcement. But,
within a short time after the group disbanded, the
situation returned to near anarchy. Arson, murder,
and election fraud continued to go unpunished.
Two particular events sparked public concern. On
19 November 1855, a gambler, Charles Cora, shot
and killed popular U.S. Marshal General William H.
Richardson. Cora was apprehended but remained in
jail pending trial. Then, on 14 May 1856, San Francisco Supervisor James P. Casey, publisher of the
San Francisco Sunday Times, shot and killed James
King, noted banker and publisher of a rival newspaper, the Daily Evening Bulletin. Casey surrendered
and sought protective custody in the county jail.

Mayor Van Ness asked a menacing crowd gathering
outside the jail to disperse and ordered 300 armed
volunteers, the Light Dragoons, the National
Lancers, and the First California Guard to surround
the area and protect Casey from the mob.
During this demonstration King’s bodyguards and
some members of the 1851 committee, led by
William T. Coleman, met secretly in the chambers
of the Society of California Pioneers, forming the
Vigilance Committee of 1856. They required candidates to complete an application, to obtain the sponsorship of two members, to pay a fee from $1 to $20,
to meet the approval of a Qualifications Committee,
and to swear an oath of allegiance. Many Catholics,
who did not wish to join a secret society, swore a special oath not to take up arms against the committee,
while 1,500 merchants and service providers as well
as lawyers and clergymen joined. They used secret
signs, grips, and passwords, responded to an alarm
bell, and marched together waving banners.
For more than three months the committee
enforced its brand of law and order. It set up court
and maintained a jail in its downtown headquarters
fortified with sandbags and two artillery pieces. It
tried and hanged four people, including Casey and
Cora, contributed to the suicide of another, tried
and incarcerated a state supreme court justice for
stabbing one of its members, posted a $5,000 reward for the arrest of arsonists, and banished
numerous rapists, thieves, abortionists, and ballotbox stuffers. The 5,000-man army captured four
city armories and a ship loaded with weapons from
a U.S. arsenal, and boarded all vessels entering San
Francisco Harbor, excluding 90 percent of prospective immigrants.
On 18 August 1856, the committee disbanded,
opened its tastefully decorated headquarters to visitors, and concluded with an all-day parade through
the streets of San Francisco. It returned all the arms
it had taken from the city, county, and state, and on
3 November, Governor J. Neely Johnson lifted his
insurrection proclamation.
The committee failed in its attempt to schedule a
state constitutional convention and hold special
county elections, but some of its members won
public office as members of the new Republican
641

Satanic Ritual Abuse

Party in November 1856, ensuring their amnesty
from prosecution.
JeDon A. Emenhiser
References
Archives of the San Francisco Vigilance Committee
of 1856. Huntington Library, San Marino,
California.
Emenhiser, JeDon A. 1962. “The San Francisco
Vigilance Committee of 1856.” Armed Politics: An
Analysis and Comparison of Six Cases in the
United States. Ph.D. diss., University of
Minnesota.

Satanic Ritual Abuse
Conspiracy-infused accusations of satanic ritual
abuse (SRA) came to the forefront in U.S. culture in
the mid-1980s through intense media attention, and
spread to Britain and Australia, and most recently
continental Europe. Those believing in SRA, commonly known as true believers, maintained that
secretive groups were involved in forcing people,
mainly children, to have sex and engage in satanic rituals such as the sacrificing of babies and drinking
their blood. In the United States the main period of
SRA accusations is from 1984 to 1994, but this is not
an entirely recent trend. In early Christian cultures
those thought to be in allegiance with the devil were
believed to be involved in forms of satanic abuse.
This reached its zenith in the Middle Ages with witch
trials and the publication in 1481 of Malleus Maleficarum by Heinrich Kraemer and Johann Sprenger,
known in English as The Witches’ Hammer.
During the 1960s U.S. Christianity became
focused on the personal and obsessed with personal
evil, typified in Roman Polanski’s 1968 film Rosemary’s Baby. In 1969 Anton Szandor La Vey wrote
The Satanic Bible and those looking for clear evidence of occult activity across the United States
believed they had found it. This was followed by
other texts such as The Satan Seller by self-declared
ex-satanic high priest Mike Warnke in 1972, claiming that occult and SRA activity was proliferating.
In 1973 William Friedkin’s film The Exorcist shockingly depicted the results of demonic possession,
642

and was supposedly based on fact. Personal stories,
such as Michelle Remembers by Michelle Smith and
Lawrence Pazder published in 1980, were taken as
evidence of the existence of SRA, with no substantial proof given.
A major incident in 1984, known as the McMartin
case, sparked accusations of SRA. At McMartin
Preschool in Manhattan Beach, California, 360 children were diagnosed with being abused via SRA.
Child abuse allegations were also levied at other
schools in the area, such as St. Cross Episcopal
Church in Hermosa Beach, and in all, 100 teachers
were accused of belonging to a satanic cult involved
in ritual molestation. The majority of charges were
dropped and the case led to further investigations
into false memory syndrome, a belief that in such
cases psychologists working with the victims of
alleged abuse place false memories through suggestion, hypnosis, and other techniques. However, this
itself is often considered another conspiracy: false
memory syndrome or recovered memory system is
not a clinical medical term and was, it is alleged by
believers of SRA, invented by those parents charged
with abuse.
Groups such as Breaking Free, an SRA survivors’
organization, have linked SRA rings to other conspiracy theories relating to disparate groups from
the Jesuits to the Freemasons, seeing SRA as
another way of bringing about the New World
Order. To true believers 60,000 people are killed
each year via SRA. Numerous cases may exist but
evidence of a more substantial conspiracy is lacking.
After the 1980s movement away from liberalism and
the rise of the Christian Right during the Reagan
era, in 1994 the U.S. saw a backlash against belief in
SRA. The general public, and therefore juries,
became skeptical of accusations made of SRA, seeing it as the product of vivid imaginations imbued
with stories from popular U.S. Christianity rather
than a reality, making prosecution in such cases
problematic.
Jason Lee
References
La Fontaine, J. S. 1992. Speak of the Devil: Tales of
Satanic Abuse in Contemporary England.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Savings and Loan Crisis

Passantino, Bob and Gretchen. 1992. “Satanic Ritual
Abuse in Popular Christian Literature.” Journal of
Psychology and Theology 20: 299–305.
Showalter, Elaine. 1997. Hystories: Hysterical
Epidemics and Modern Culture. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Stanford, P. 1997. The Devil. A Biography. London:
Mandarin.

Savings and Loan Crisis
When a trickle of failed savings and loan (S&L) institutions in the 1970s turned into a torrent by the end
of the decade, blame was apportioned everywhere.
More than a few prominent politicians found themselves implicated in the collapse—some through
direct ownership, such as Neil Bush, the son of
then-Vice-President George H. W. Bush—and some
through investments “placed” by others, such as Bill
and Hillary Clinton. Before the scandal was over,
five politicians were investigated on charges of peddling their influence on behalf of Charles Keating.
Although none were indicted, the “Keating Five”
sparked calls for renewed campaign finance laws.
The S&L crisis had its origins in the laws under
which S&Ls operated. Early S&Ls were intended to
finance mortgages, and to do that they needed a
more stable deposit base than commercial banks
(which made loans to individuals and businesses).
Congress therefore allowed S&Ls to pay slightly
higher interest rates for deposits, but in turn restricted their lending, prohibiting them, for example, from having checking accounts or lending on
consumer items, such as cars or appliances. This
strategy worked well for S&Ls in the 1950s and early
1960s, when interest rates were stable or moved
slowly. As long as the S&L had a chance to adapt its
new mortgage structure to higher interest rates over
time, it could remain stable. What threatened the
existence of the entire industry, however, was rapid
inflation.
In the early 1970s, the combination of federal
deficits, union wage increases, and oil price
increases sent prices skyrocketing, reaching levels
nearing “hyperinflation” by the end of the decade.
To obtain funds, S&Ls had to pay increasingly
higher interest on deposits. After 1973, regulators

permitted S&Ls to offer “Jumbo Certificates of
Deposit.” But with their loans tied up in long-term
(fifteen- to thirty-year) mortgages, the institutions
experienced “disintermediation”—a term that
describes a gap between the deposit interest paid
and the loan interest received. In short, the S&Ls
were “selling” their product—their mortgages—for
far less than they were paying for the money to
finance new mortgages, and the long-term nature of
the thirty-year fixed mortgages meant that there
was no way for the S&Ls to adjust. “Variable rate”
mortgages appeared, but that did nothing to
address the immediate shortfalls.
Another factor, traced back to Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal, came into play. During the banking “reforms” of the Great Depression, Congress
had established deposit insurance for banks (the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or FDIC)
and for S&Ls (the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, or FSLIC). These “corporations”
provided government funds to insure depositors
against losses in their accounts should the banks or
S&Ls fail. (Many observers of the day had credited
the creation of the FDIC with shoring up the banks
in the 1930s, but in fact the key policy move involved Roosevelt’s decision to take the United States
off the gold standard.) No substantial runs had
threatened either system since the 1930s, and thus
little attention was paid to the “moral hazard” posed
by, in essence, separating the welfare of the depositors from the health of the institution itself. Put
another way, with the government insuring deposits,
potentially corrupt bank managers or owners had an
incentive to take risks they would not otherwise
take.
Until the disintermediation crisis occurred, S&L
owners and managers had no need to engage in particularly risky operations. But faced with a sudden
shortfall in profits that could not be met through
normal means, they pursued two avenues of escape.
One involved the time-tested appeal to Congress
for special assistance. In 1982, the Garn-St. Germain Act expanded the power of S&Ls by allowing
them to pursue investments aggressively in a variety
of areas previously denied them, such as offering
checking accounts. S&Ls, in short, were permitted
643

Savings and Loan Crisis

to act like banks. That did little to stop the hemorrhaging, and between 1981 and 1982, the S&Ls lost
between $11 and $12 billion. Worse, seeing that
their customers were “protected” by deposit insurance, many S&L owners sought quick fixes by
investing in highly speculative ventures, especially
land.
Critics of the day claimed that the S&L industry’s
collapse was tied to “junk bonds,” as in the case of
Michael Milken and his placement of junk bonds
with Columbia Savings and Loan in Beverly Hills. A
more important connection of wheeler-dealers came
when Milken hooked up with Charles Keating of
Cincinnati who received $119 million in Drexel
Burnham Lambert–underwritten bonds to finance
the American Continental Corporation, a real estate
development firm that Keating tapped to purchase
Lincoln Savings and Loan in Irvine, California.
Keating then used the S&L money to purchase
more junk bonds. When these investments collapsed, Keating was investigated by the Securities
and Exchange Commission. During the investigation, Keating met with five senators, John McCain
(R-AZ), Dennis DeConcini (D-AZ), John Glenn (DOH), Alan Cranston (D-CA), and Don Riegle (DMI), each of whom had received $1 million in campaign contributions from Keating. The Senate
Ethics Committee found that Cranston, DeConcini,
and Riegle had interfered with the investigation, but
only Cranston was censured. (McCain later made a
political career out of calling for “campaign finance
reform”—after he had benefited from the largesse!)
Lincoln lost $3.4 billion, and Keating served time in
jail for fraud.
Despite these examples, most of the failed S&Ls
had their money in land and development projects.
The worst of these were “daisy chains,” in which
one piece of speculative property was used as collateral for a loan at another S&L, whose loan was
then used to purchase another piece of speculative
land, and so on. It was no surprise that the states
with the largest numbers of S&L failures were
those states with plenty of land yet to develop—
Texas, Florida, California, and Arizona. After the
government shut down the S&Ls in a series of acts
aimed at dealing with the failed institutions, Uncle
644

Sam acquired their land assets. Wisely, the government held on to most of the land and, over time,
land values returned. The “bill” for the S&L crisis
was never as high as had been predicted in the
1980s (the Office of Management and Budget, in
1989, estimated $257 billion would be needed),
although fixing a final cost of the debacle is still an
exercise in futility depending on which dates are
used. Conspiracy literature attempting to link the
“Reagan-Bush” administrations to the “looting” of
the S&Ls claimed that the final tab would be $400
billion to $500 billion, an amount that is wildly exaggerated by any evidence provided from either the
banking industry or the government. From 1960 to
1990, the number of S&Ls fell from 6,000 to about
3,000, and even as conditions improved, the government changed both the examination procedures
and the capital requirements, which further reduced the number of troubled institutions.
By the time the S&L debacle was over, wellknown celebrities such as Keating, Milken, and several politicians had been investigated. President
George Bush’s son, Neil, who was a director of Silverado Savings and Loan in Colorado, was the target
of ethics charges for his defaults in that S&L, while
his brother Jeb was loosely associated with Broward
Savings and Loan in Florida. Publications such as
Mother Jones railed about the “involvement” of the
Bushes, yet no evidence has yet shown them to have
been directly involved in any malfeasance.
Quite different was the involvement of Bill and
Hillary Clinton in the infamous “Whitewater” scandal, in which the Clintons, with Arkansas developer
James McDougall, the owner of Madison Guaranty
and Loan in Arkansas, purchased ownership in a
development project called Whitewater. Madison
was investigated, and put into conservatorship as
insolvent after lending considerable money through
Susan McDougal, James’s wife, to Whitewater and
other development projects. Hillary Clinton, through
her position at the Rose Law Firm, was the primary
attorney preparing all the documents and signed
them all (as well as billed her hours based on that
work), although she later claimed that she did none
of the work. By the time Bill Clinton became president, the Whitewater scandal demanded the ap-

Scaife, Richard Mellon

pointment of a special prosecutor, Robert Fiske, who
soon was replaced by Judge Kenneth Starr. Ultimately, the failed Arkansas S&L would lead to Clinton’s impeachment in 1999.
Larry Schweikart
See also: Clinton, Bill and Hillary.
References
Adams, James Ring. 1990. The Big Fix: Inside the
S&L Scandal. New York: John Wiley.
Benston, George, and George Kaufman. 1990.
“Understanding the Savings and Loan Debate.”
The Public Interest, Spring, 79–95.
Kane, Edward. 1990. “FIRREA: Financial
Malpractice.” Durrell Journal of Money and
Banking, May, 2–10.
O’Driscoll, Gerald P. 1990. “Bank Failures: The
Deposit Insurance Connection.” Contemporary
Policy Issues 6 (April): 1–12.
Pilzer, Paul Zane, and Robert Deitz. 1989. Other
People’s Money: The Inside Story of the S&L
Scandal. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Pizzo, Stephen, Mary Fricker, and Paul Muolo.
1989. Inside Job: The Looting of America’s
Savings and Loans. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Scaife, Richard Mellon
It might be argued that Richard Mellon Scaife pursues conspiracies from two perspectives from his
base in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. On the one hand,
as a wealthy donor to numerous right-wing institutions in the United States, Scaife has funded many
articles and studies blaming liberals and Communists for conspiring against the economic wellbeing, security, and morality of the U.S. people. On
the other hand, his critics charge that Scaife has
launched numerous conspiracies attacking his political enemies on the Left. Furthermore, many of
Scaife’s associates have noted his long-standing
predilection for conspiracy theories (Kaiser and
Chinoy).
Scaife is heir to a family fortune that, through
enterprise and marriage, grew to include the Mellon Bank and major investments in Gulf Oil and
Alcoa. In addition to substantial personal wealth,

Scaife also controls three foundations: the Sarah
Scaife Foundation, with 1999 assets of $302 million;
the Allegheny Foundation, with $39 million; and
the Carthage Foundation, with $24 million. Scaife’s
children control a fourth entity, the Scaife Family
Foundation, with $170 million in assets.
Scaife’s funding of conservative groups began in
the early 1960s and he backed ultraconservative
presidential candidate Barry Goldwater, Jr., who
was trounced in the 1964 general election. Scaife
contributed $1 million to the 1972 election campaign of Richard Nixon, and some $45,000 ended
up in an illegal fund tied to the Watergate scandal.
Scaife went on to fund scores of right-wing policy
think tanks, legal groups, and publications. He
joined with beer magnate Joseph Coors to start the
Heritage Foundation, the flagship think tank of the
U.S. New Right. Heritage supplied the working
papers for many of the conservative policies of the
Reagan administration, which began in 1981. During this period, various Scaife entities funded conservative causes at the rate of about $10 million per
year, with a cumulative total of $340 million by
1999.
Scaife is fascinated with intelligence agencies and
military affairs, and reportedly was a fan of FBI
director J. Edgar Hoover. In the 1970s Scaife
owned a publishing enterprise that included an
international news agency based in London that
Scaife shut down shortly before it was accused of
cooperating with the CIA to produce anticommunist propaganda.
Scaife has also funded the Center for Strategic
and International Studies and the Maldon Institute.
Both groups publish studies stressing global conspiracies of Communists and socialists, and, more
recently, anarchists and Muslims. Maldon features
the work of John Rees, who infiltrated and spied on
left-wing groups in the late 1960s and 1970s with
information being shared with right-wing publications and the FBI.
Other Scaife-funded organizations include the
Western Journalism Center, American Spectator,
Accuracy in Media, Landmark Legal Foundation,
and Judicial Watch—all of which were especially
active in the anti-Clinton network.
645

Scientology

When Hillary Clinton said her husband, President William Jefferson Clinton, was the target of a
vast right-wing conspiracy seeking impeachment,
her comments echoed a study prepared by a Democratic Party analyst that placed Scaife at the hub of
a covert anti-Clinton campaign. While Ms. Clinton
may have been overstating the case, Scaife funding
was important in sustaining anti-Clinton conspiracy
theories, especially around the case of Clinton’s aide
Vince Foster, whose suicide early in the Clinton
administration was widely regarded as suspicious by
the political Right.
Scaife hired former New York Post reporter
Christopher Ruddy to pursue the idea that Vince
Foster’s death was not a suicide, as well as other stories about Clinton’s alleged involvement in various
conspiracies. Scaife published these articles in the
Pittsburgh Tribune-Review, one of a number of publications controlled by Scaife. Ruddy helped bring
the conspiracy allegations about Clinton floating
across the Internet and the front pages of the tabloid
press into mainstream coverage in major daily newspapers and network television news.
Scaife’s foundations gave $2.4 million to the
American Spectator Education Foundation while its
sister organization, the conservative American Spectator magazine, was running a series of anti-Clinton
articles, one of which prompted Paula Jones to sue
the president, alleging sexual misconduct. The foundation also launched the “Arkansas Project,” financing anti-Clinton information-gathering operations
involving reporters, private investigators, former law
enforcement officers, and political operatives.
Between 1993 and 1996, $1.7 million of the Scaife
funds reported as legal fees were apparently used
for the Arkansas Project. Some of this money was
used to promote the idea that the Clintons were
involved in a massive real estate scam dubbed
“Whitewater.”
Scaife, who turned sixty-seven in the year 2000,
can be personable and gracious, but he is secretive
and avoids public scrutiny. He also has a creative, if
nasty, temper. Investigative reporter Karen Rothmyer doggedly pursued an interview with Scaife for
a 1981 article in the Columbia Journalism Review.
When she finally tracked Scaife down and con646

fronted him outside a corporate meeting, Rothmyer
asked about Scaife’s funding of the New Right.
Scaife’s now-legendary retort—printed in an article
sidebar—was, “You fucking Communist cunt, get
out of here” (Rothmyer).
Rothmeyer and reporter David Warner were the
first to note that Scaife funded conservative projects
in a very strategic manner to maximize the propaganda value of his dollars. Scaife accomplishes this
by simultaneously funding several different projects
at different groups on the same topic. According to
Rothmeyer, the result is that in matters of defense
and economic policy Scaife has helped to foster the
illusion that there is a far greater diversity of views
than actually exists. This has helped shift political
discourse further to the right in the United States.
Chip Berlet
See also: Clinton, Bill and Hillary; Foster, Vince;
Whitewater.
References
Berlet, Chip, and Matthew N. Lyons. 2000. RightWing Populism in America: Too Close for
Comfort. New York: Guildford Press.
Conason, Joe, and Gene Lyons. 2000. The Hunting
of the President: The Ten-Year Campaign to
Destroy Bill and Hillary Clinton. New York: St.
Martin’s Press.
Kaiser, Robert G., and Ira Chinoy. 1999. “How
Scaife’s Money Powered a Movement.”
Washington Post, May 2, A1.
Rothmyer, Karen. 1981. “Citizen Scaife.” Columbia
Journalism Review. July–August.
Warner, David. 1981. “Scaife.” Four-part series in
the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, including “Scaife:
Financier of the Right,” 20 April; and “Scaife the
Publisher: His Favorite Role,” 22 April.

Scientology
The Church of Scientology, to its promoters, or cult
of Scientology, to its detractors, began in the United
States in the 1950s and is characterized by a notion of
personal psychology that verges on the conspiratorial.
Scientology became well known in the 1980s and
1990s due to a number of controversies surrounding
it and the media obsession with prominent members,
in particular the actor John Travolta. Scientology
originated with L. Ron Hubbard, an English science

Secular Humanism

fiction writer. His book Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health outlined his theories and is the
practical text of the so-called religion. Estimates vary
widely on worldwide membership; cynics put numbers as low as 70,000, while Scientologists claim
membership is more like 15 million.
Several conspiracy theories are connected with
Scientology. First, in relation to personal psychology, Scientological theory holds that the self has
been manipulated and warped by external factors.
Linked to this idea on a global scale, groups such as
drug companies and financiers are manipulating
the world. The Scientologist must therefore reach
the state of “Clear,” in order to be free from bad
memories and external, controlling influences.
Devices such as the “E-Meter” are used to determine the level of treatment needed by the individual. Overall, Scientologists hope that the world will
become Clear, an idea that has provoked fears
about Scientology’s plans for global transformation
and domination among some critics. Second, at a
deeper level, through “Auditing” a Scientologist
aims to remove the influence of “Body Thetans.”
For believers these are the traces of those beings
brought to earth millions of years ago by the alien
Xenu due to overpopulation in the Galactic Federation. These beings were exterminated by hydrogen
bombs and their souls ended up in humans. Mental
anguish and problems have resulted from this and
the Scientologist must reengage with the moment
of the extermination to be healed. Thus, at the heart
of Scientology there is an alien conspiracy theory.
Scientology’s detractors claim that the organization is a manipulative, brainwashing cult dedicated
to gaining members’ money and encouraging bankruptcy and suicide; for many of its critics, Scientology is seen as a major world evil. The core conflict
has taken place on the Internet. Due to copyright
laws, much of Scientology’s material is unavailable to
the public, yet its detractors, frequently disgruntled
ex-members, have published this material on the
Internet. In the 1980s eleven members were jailed
for theft of material that was thought to be damaging to the organization, suggesting that the organization is aware of a conspiracy against it. Scientology
has been banned from Germany and France, while

Hollywood has rallied around it, with producers and
directors signing a petition in support of freedom of
religion.
Jason Lee
References
Corydon, Brent, and L. Ron Hubbard, Jr. 1996.
Messiah or Madman? Secaucus, NJ: Lyle Stuart.
Lamont, Stewart. 1986. Religion Inc. The Church of
Scientology. London: Harrap.
Malko, George. 1970. Scientology: The Now
Religion. New York: Delacorte.
Wallis, Roy. The Road to Total Freedom. A
Sociological Analysis of Scientology. New York:
Columbia University Press.

Secular Humanism
In 1933 a group of liberal intellectuals, including
education reformer John Dewey, published the
Humanist Manifesto, which argued that “the traditional dogmatic or authoritarian religions that place
revelation, God, ritual or creed above human needs
and experience do a disservice to the human species”
(Martin, 195). Revised and reissued in 1973, the
manifesto was little noticed by most Americans.
Among some Christian traditionalists, however, the
ideas propounded by the Humanist Manifesto came
to be perceived as a form of godless secular religion
competing with the Judeo-Christian ethic for the
heart and soul of the nation.
Catholic ideologues in the 1960s launched the current crusade to define secular humanism as a threat
to Christianity, but is was Protestant evangelicals,
especially fundamentalists, who made it a major battleground in what became known as the Culture
Wars of the 1980s. At first, Christian activists such as
protestant doctor C. Everett Koop, active in the
mostly Catholic antiabortion movement, and Francis
A. Schaeffer, a popular Protestant theologian, developed intellectual arguments and a theological
approach to combating secular humanism. Together
they wrote a book titled Whatever Happened to the
Human Race? A film version was screened across the
country in church auditoriums and rented halls.
This was a time when some Protestant fundamentalists were discussing the work of Christian
647

September 11

evangelical writer Hal Lindsey, who argued that
contemporary world events revealed the signs of
the End Times heralding the apocalypse and the
Second Coming of Christ. One way of reading the
prophecies in the Book of Revelation in the New
Testament is that the End Times bring a conspiracy
of leading political and religious leaders, who join
forces with Satan to build a one-world government
and new world order ruled by the Antichrist. Soon
there was a discussion in fundamentalist circles as
to whether the spread of secular humanism was just
a symptom of liberal permissiveness, or part of a
long-standing secret Communist conspiracy to
spread Godlessness, or even part of the satanic End
Times conspiracy.
Already angered by a series of U.S. Supreme
Court decisions permitting the sale of pornography
and allowing abortion, Christian evangelicals created a battle line over new educational curricula
featuring books that frankly discussed human sexuality, criticisms of foreign and domestic policies, and
race relations. This was seen as an example of secular humanism infecting the public schools. In 1974
a parents’ revolt against new textbooks in Kanawha
County, West Virginia, hit the headlines as national
conservative groups including the Heritage Foundation rallied to the side of the parents.
During the 1970s and 1980s there were dozens
of books published exploring the liberal “conspiracy” to promote secular humanism and take God
out of the United States. Some argued that the very
idea of public education was part of a plot to brainwash children to defy authority, disobey their parents, and reject religion. During the cold war, this
was linked to a liberal conspiracy to weaken the
United States and pave the way for a Soviet Communist invasion.
According to George Marsden, the new focus on
secular humanism “revitalized fundamentalist conspiracy theory.” The threats of “Communism and
socialism could, of course, be fit right into the
humanist picture,” wrote Marsden, “but so could all
the moral and legal changes at home without
implausible scenarios of Russian agents infiltrating
American schools, government, reform movements, and mainline churches” (109). When the
648

Soviet Union collapsed, the belief in a conspiracy of
secular humanists provided continuity, and allowed
for a seamless shift in targets from the red menace
to contemporary threats such as the feminist movement, the pro-choice movement, and the gay rights
movement.
Conservative groups that at various times have
publicized the idea of a secular humanist conspiracy
include the Christian Coalition (Pat Robertson), the
Eagle Forum (Phyllis Schlafly), Concerned Women
for America (Beverly LaHaye), American Coalition
for Traditional Values (Tim LaHaye), Christian
Anti-Communism Crusade (Fred Schwarz), and
the John Birch Society (Robert Welch).
Christian Right activists Gary Bauer and James
Dobson described the struggle between Christians
and secular humanists for the hearts and minds of
Americans as a “great Civil War of Values” (Martin,
344). Dobson’s organization, Focus on the Family,
is a huge national operation that publishes numerous magazines and sponsors a daily nationally syndicated radio program. Through these and other
media the Christian Right continues to warn of the
dangers of secular humanism, and frequently suggests it is part of a decades-old secret conspiracy.
Chip Berlet
See also Abortion; Anticommunism;
Apocaplyticism; John Birch Society; Robertson,
Pat.
References
Diamond, Sara. 1995. Roads to Dominion: RightWing Movements and Political Power in the
United States. New York: Guilford Press.
Marsden, George M. 1991. Understanding
Fundamentalism and Evangelicalism. Grand
Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co.
Martin, William. 1996. With God on Our Side: The
Rise of the Religious Right in America. New York:
Broadway Books.

September 11
The attacks on the World Trade Center (WTC) and
the Pentagon, and the plane that crashed in Pennsylvania on the morning of 11 September 2001 have
brought forth a plethora of conspiracy theories,
most of which arose outside the United States and

September 11

have only slowly been gaining ground among the
U.S people. In Muslim countries, many people
immediately doubted that Osama Bin Laden was
behind the attacks, suggesting instead that they
were a plot by the Bush administration to discredit
Muslims and justify greater world domination.
While not suspecting U.S. government involvement, other Muslims remain unconvinced by the
sparse evidence of Osama Bin Laden’s guilt. For
instance, the open letter entitled “How We Can
Coexist” (May 2002) signed by Islamic scholars and
intellectuals and addressed to the U.S. authors of
the open letter “What We’re Fighting For” (February 2002) speaks openly of “alleged perpetrators.”
But accusations of a plot by the U.S. government
are by no means limited to Muslim nations. Frenchman Thierry Meyssan states as much in L’Effroyable
imposture (published in English as 9/11, The Big
Lie). He bases his suspicions among other things on
reports that several of the nineteen alleged hijackers
are still alive. He also doubts that flight 77 ever flew
into the Pentagon. The proposal that a bomb or missile—not a plane—hit the Pentagon has been gaining popularity, especially with the appearance on the
Internet of numerous photos of the Pentagon that
seem to belie the impact of a plane.
Meyssan’s theory has been under harsh criticism
both in the United States and in France. One of his
critics is compatriot Guillaume Dasquié, coauthor
(with Jean Guisnel) of L’Effroyable mensonge (no
English translation to date), which takes Meyssan to
task on a number of messy details, such as the eyewitnesses of the crash at the Pentagon and the
whereabouts of flight 77 and its passengers if there
was no crash. Dasquié is perhaps eager to disprove
Meyssan because he has his own conspiracy theory.
In Ben Laden: La Vérité interdite (published in
English as Forbidden Truth), coauthored with JeanCharles Brisard, the theory is that the Bush administration had already been planning to invade
Afghanistan before September 11 to build a natural
gas pipeline and that it used the attacks as a front.
Specifically, U.S. officials are said to have met with
mediating Pakistani officials in July of 2001 to present an ultimatum to the Taliban: a carpet of gold
(the pipeline) or a carpet of bombs.

Dasquié and Brisard also point out that both the
Bush and Clinton administrations actively protected
Bin Laden from investigations. For instance, FBI
agent John O’Neill, who had been in charge of investigating Bin Laden in the 1990s, quit his post out of
frustration in the summer of 2002 to become—ironically—security chief at the WTC. He died trying to
save lives in the attack. O’Neill claimed he had been
obstructed by colleagues trying to protect the oil
interests of the U.S. and Saudi Arabia, but the FBI
claims that O’Neill was making too many enemies in
the Arab world—and too many espionage mistakes.
In addition, Dasquié and Brisard document the
failure of the United States to prosecute Osama Bin
Laden: in March 1998, it was Libya’s Gaddafi, not
Clinton, who asked Interpol for the first international arrest warrant for Bin Laden. Gaddafi suspected fundamentalist Bin Laden of destabilizing
Libya’s moderate Muslim state—at the behest of
the U.S. Interpol ignored the warrant, Dasquié and
Brisard write. But even before that, in March 1996,
the U.S. refused an offer by the government of
Sudan to extradite Osama Bin Laden to the United
States.
The similar theory that the U.S. government
knew about the attacks beforehand and prepared to
take advantage of them politically rather than prevent them has been gaining more ground inside the
United States than the more far-fetched theory that
the U.S. government is itself responsible for the
attacks (the planes that flew into the WTC would
then have been remote-controlled). While the former theory is far from proven, it at least seems to be
supported by five widely accepted facts: there were
warnings of upcoming attacks from U.S. allies (such
as France and Egypt); the FBI itself had evidence
but failed to “connect the dots”; the U.S. government has a long history of supporting Bin Laden
and the Taliban; the Bush family has a history of
business deals with the Bin Laden family; and the
Bush administration was quick to make political
capital of September 11, such as with the Patriot
Act, which some claim was prepared in advance of
the attacks.
Two websites have collected information and
posed tough questions (almost all of which remain
649

September 11

unanswered to date) without themselves aiming to
formulate a unified conspiracy theory. One is
Canada’s Centre for Research on Globalization
(particularly Michel Chossudovsky, author of War
and Globalization, the Truth behind 9/11), and the
other is Germany’s Telepolis (featuring in particular
the work of Mathias Bröckers). Bröckers describes
himself as an “anti-conspiracy theorist,” believing
that Bush has no idea who is behind September 11
and so invented the al Qaeda conspiracy to suit his
purposes.
The unanswered issues include: Why was a plane
able to penetrate the world’s most heavily guarded
no-fly zone at all, much less 50 minutes after the first
plane hit the WTC and 80 minutes after air controllers reported it hijacked, which by law requires
interceptor jets to be scrambled? Why are seven of
the eight flight recorders irreparably damaged,
though they are made to withstand such crashes?
Why has the unusual volume of stock transactions
(especially put-options) in the few days preceding 11
September 2001 not been traced back to its
sources? And why has no one investigated the payment of $100,000 to Mohammed Atta’s account in
Florida from Pakistan’s Ahmad Omar Sheikh on
behalf of Lt-Gen Mahmud Ahmad, former director
of ISI (Pakistan’s intelligence agency)? The Times of
India, which originally reported the transaction on 9
October 2001, argued that a direct link between the
ISI and the WTC attack would be of immense significance. Instead, researchers into September 11
note, not only has this matter not been investigated,
but there was also no mention of Omar Sheikh’s role
in the transactions when he was later found guilty of
murdering reporter Daniel Pearl and sentenced to
death.
The list of unanswered questions is much longer,
but the central unanswered question for conspiracy
theorists is probably: why did George W. Bush personally limit investigations into all matters related to
September 11 in January 2002? The official reason is
that the available resources are to be used to fight the
war on terrorism. But the Bush administration seems
to be well versed in withholding resources, beginning
with its refusal to disclose papers relating to its connections to the Enron scandal. And in October 2002,
650

U.S. Senate Intelligence Committee Chairman Bob
Graham, a Florida Democrat who is privy to the limited investigations into September 11, began calling
for declassification of what he deemed to be most
important information.
In late November 2002, Bush appointed Henry
Kissinger (himself a familiar figure in conspiracy
theories) to head the September 11 investigation
commission, whose purpose according to the New
York Times is to “help the administration learn the
tactics and motives of the enemy,” rather than to
uncover mistakes on the part of the government or
security agencies that might have prevented the
attacks, a limit that is much to the chagrin of the
families of September 11 victims. Within two weeks,
however, Kissinger resigned from the commission,
citing potential conflict of interests with his public
relations work, details of which he was unwilling to
disclose in the usual fashion.
At the time of writing, major newspapers in the
United States are full of reports about how September 11 could have been prevented. At the end of
October 2002, American ex-patriot novelist Gore
Vidal published his conspiracy theory (in the British
press) entitled “The Enemy Within,” in which he
points the finger at Bush Sr. and Jr. as well as Pakistan. But the most widely accepted “explanation”
for September 11 within the United States is still
sheer incompetence on the part of U.S. intelligence.
Craig Morris
See also: Domestic Terrorism; Kissinger, Henry.
References
Ahmed, Nafeez Mossadeq. 2002. The War on
Freedom: How and Why America Was Attacked,
September 11, 2001. Joshua Tree, CA: Tree of
Life.
Brisard, Jean-Charles, and Guillaume Dasquié.
2002. Forbidden Truth: U.S.-Taliban Secret Oil
Diplomacy, Saudi Arabia, and the Failed Search
for bin Laden. New York: Thunder’s Mouth
Press/Nation Book.
Bröckers, Mathias. 2002. Verschwörungen,
Verschwörungstheorien und die Geheimnisse des
11.9. Frankfurt, Germany: Zweitausendeins.
Chossudovsky, Michael. 2002. “Foreknowledge of
9–11.” http://globalresearch.ca/articles/
CRG204A.html.

Shakur, Tupac

Dasquié, Guillaume, and Jean Guisnel. 2002.
L’Effroyable mensonge: thèse et foutaises sur les
attentats du 11 septembre. Paris: La Découverte.
Meyssan, Thierry. 2002. 9/11: The Big Lie. Chatou,
France: Carnot.
Websites
Global Howler: http://www.globalhowler.com.
What Really Happened: http://whatreallyhappened.
com.

Seventh Day Adventists
Seventh Day Adventism (SDA) is a form of Christianity whose theology is marked by an apocalyptic
and at times conspiratorial tone. According to the
Adventist Church itself, SDA is a worldwide community of over 8 million members, with millions of
others regarding the church as their spiritual home.
Doctrinally, SDA was formed from the interfaith
Millerite movement of the 1840s. Importantly, it was
during this period that much of U.S. Protestantism
became pessimistic about the work of God and his
followers on earth. The earth was thought to be a
corrupt place in Satan’s hands and thus the only hope
lay in the apocalypse. Elements of this theology can
be found in a number of movements, such as Mormonism, Jehovah’s Witnesses, Seventh Day Adventists, and their offshoot, the Branch Davidians.
Between 1831 and 1844, William Miller, a Baptist
preacher and former army captain, launched the
second-advent awakening. Based on his study of the
prophecy of the Book of Daniel 8:14 (“It will take
2,300 evenings and mornings; then the sanctuary
will be consecrated”), Miller calculated that Jesus
would return to earth sometime between 1843 and
1844. Others within the movement calculated a specific date of 22 October 1844. When Jesus did not
appear, Miller’s followers experienced what came to
be called the Great Disappointment. Most left him,
but some concluded that 22 October had been correct and became convinced that the Bible prophecy
predicted not the return of Jesus in 1844, but that he
would begin at that time a special ministry in heaven
for his followers. James and Ellen G. White and
Joseph Bates, a retired sea captain, took on leadership roles in the newly formed Adventist Church.
Ellen G. White became the spiritual counselor of

SDA for more than seventy years until her death in
1915. Early Adventists came to believe that she
enjoyed God’s special guidance, while Christian
Protestant groups that denounce the Seventh Day
Adventists believe they have placed Ellen G. White
as a prophet, heretical to orthodox theology. In 1860,
at Battle Creek, Michigan, the wide group Adventists chose the name Seventh Day Adventist and in
1863 formally organized a church body with a membership of 3,500.
The movement began to slowly spread through
the rest of the world during the twentieth century.
Since the early 1980s SDA has experienced much
division, with groups splitting off, some known as
“the remnant church,” and perceived as more fundamentalist. Many outside these splinter groups
believe in the conspiratorial theory that the remnant church is trying to dominant the world, but in
turn that group believes that the rest of the world,
including all other Protestants, will face the fires of
hell and are part of a global conspiracy of evil,
linked to the “New World Order.” Some Christian
groups are prepared to believe that SDA is a Christian church holding the core Christian doctrines,
but others are convinced that it is a secretive and
malevolent cult.
Jason Lee
See also: Apocalypticism; Millenarianism;
Millerites; New World Order; Waco.
References
Christian Research Institute. “Seventh-day
Adventism.” http://www.equip.org/free/DS410.
html.
Seventh Day Adventist Church, official website:
http://www.adventists.org.

Shakur, Tupac
Conspiracy narratives pervaded the life, death, and
art of rapper and film star Tupac (2Pac) Shakur
(1971–1996). He was born into the black nationalist
Shakur family in times of intense political activism.
This was the golden age of political conspiracy, as
Tupac’s “parent culture” battled with the covert
actions and government informers of the Nixon
administration. His mother, Afeni, was one of the
651

Shays’ Rebellion

famous Panther 21, tried for and acquitted of conspiring to blow up several New York department
stores while pregnant with Tupac.
A wide assortment of conspiracy motifs punctuated Tupac’s rap rhymes. His politically insurgent
debut album 2Pacalypse Now (1991) critiqued the
racist and exploitative U.S. social order, particularly
brutal and corrupt policing. Lamenting a perceived
racial genocide of young black men, he raps, “one by
one we are being wiped off the face of the earth”
(“Words of Wisdom”). In 1995, he released his most
critically acclaimed album, Me Against the World,
pervaded by paranoid testaments and suicidal ruminations (“Death Around the Corner,” “If I Die Tonite”). Here he explored the old paranoid adage that
to be insane is the only sane response to a crazy
world. In the year of his tragic murder, he produced
his most conspiratorially redolent album: Don Killuminati: The 7-Day Theory, released under the stagename “Makaveli.” Here Tupac throws all sorts of
plots into the mix, achieving an overblown, baroque
conspiracist mode. The album cover depicts Tupac
martyred on a cross, and the title marries religion and
numerology (“7-Day Theory”), the Mafia (“don”),
and ancient conspiratorial beliefs (the play on “Illuminati”). Taken together, Tupac’s aesthetic gives
expressive shape to the idea of “insecure paranoia”
(Knight, 229), arising from the confounding complexities and inequalities of contemporary society
marked by economic uncertainty and information
overload.
Tupac was gunned down in Las Vegas in 1996,
generating a fresh spate of conspiracy theories. Two
theories predominated: Tupac was still alive and
had only faked his own death to increase sales or to
evade assailants; his murder was the result of an
elaborate plot by the police, by his music industry
rivals, or by his own record label, Death Row
Records. Fueling the first of these theories was the
macabre video for the single “I Ain’t Mad at Cha,”
filmed one month before his death and endlessly
rotated on MTV posthumously, portraying Tupac
being shot and going to heaven. Influential hip-hop
figure Chuck D entered the conspiratorial fray by
posting “Thirteen Reasons Why Tupac Is Still
Alive” on his website. These included the con652

tention that Tupac died on Friday the 13th (which
is true), and that there was no autopsy (which is
not). Despite the best efforts of fans, who tend to
rewrite events when confronted with the sudden
and premature death of their celebrity idols, the
stark fact of Tupac’s demise has become increasingly inescapable—aided by photos of the postautopsy rapper published in Cathy Scott’s book
about his death. However, debate about those
responsible for the star’s murder continues to flourish, fueled by the likes of Nick Broomfield’s recent
ill-informed film Biggie and Tupac (2002), which—
unpersuasively—points the finger for the slaying at
Tupac’s Death Row boss, Suge Knight.
Eithne Quinn
See also: African Americans; Cocaine; Illuminati;
Nation of Islam.
References
Knight, Peter. 2000. Conspiracy Culture: From the
Kennedy Assassination to The X-Files. London
and New York: Routledge.
Quinn, Eithne. 2002. “‘All Eyez on Me’: The
Paranoid Style of Tupac Shakur.” Pp. 177–201 in
Peter Knight, ed. Conspiracy Nation: The Politics
of Paranoia in Postwar America. New York: New
York University Press.
Scott, Cathy. 1997. The Killing of Tupac Shakur. Las
Vegas, NV: Huntington Press.

Shays’ Rebellion
The economic crisis that followed the American
Revolution sparked a contraction of credit that hit
poor frontier inhabitants particularly hard in the
wake of shaky harvest seasons. To pay the war debt,
creditors and collectors demanded specie—hard
coin—instead of the inflation-prone paper money
that had funded the revolution and provided
debtors with reasonable means toward solvency.
Backcountry economic systems, which predominantly functioned in networks of barter rather than
cash exchange, could not readily accommodate the
change. As western towns exercised only the weakest influence over the Commonwealth Assembly,
direct action provided their only recourse against
this imposition. Throughout the frontier, protestors

Silver Shirts

shut down courts, obstructed sheriffs and tax collectors, and at rare moments took up arms to
defend their understanding of economic liberty
against what they understood as a Federalist plot to
impose a renewed economic and political hierarchy
over a newly democratic land.
Drawing on colonial and revolutionary methods
of popular protest, resistance to the renewed surge
of debt enforcement and taxation spanned the new
nation from South Carolina to Maine. While most
historical accounts center on rare incidents of violence, the vast majority of this resistance proved
entirely peaceable, centering on evading court
appearances and obstructing sheriffs and tax men.
One Pennsylvania town went so far as to erect a 4foot-high “wall of stink” out of fifteen wagon loads
of manure to defend their main road against officials (Bouton, 856)
The Regulator Movement that became known as
“Shays’ Rebellion” provided a particular focal point
for this struggle. Fearing a conspiracy to destabilize
the new nation and the depredations of unruly
“mobs,” political opponents of the resistance
dubbed the western Massachusetts movement
“Shays’ Rebellion” after Captain Daniel Shays, a
Revolutionary War veteran who participated in the
protests. Casting Shays as an insurgent leader provided the spin that the Massachusetts government
needed to set off fears of despotism and rebellion
against the Republic itself.
Neither led by Shays nor engaged in revolt against
government, farmers organized in committees to
coordinate what they termed a “Regulation” to
defend the lands and liberties they claimed as a
result of the Revolutionary War. In a society where
basic political rights stemmed from economic independence (primarily in the form of freehold land),
foreclosures and excessive tax demands seemed to
threaten the core liberties of men and women who
had fought long and hard for their independence.
Regulators organized marches, harried magistrates
and tax men, evaded summons, petitioned against
the 1780 Massachusetts Constitution, and held their
own extralegal county conventions. These activities,
in the making since Rev. Samuel Ely’s 1782 agitations against court and constitution, came to a head

in 1786 and 1787 with a coordinated series of attacks
on debtors’ courts.
Organized in detail and conducted in large part
by seasoned militia units, these aggressive protests
brought national attention to the situation in western Massachusetts. Massachusetts governor James
Bowdoin hired a private army to quell the disturbance, pitting poor easterners against poor westerners in an effort to restore order to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the Republic at large.
After a disastrous attempt to capture the federal
arsenal at Springfield, the Massachusetts Regulator
Movement disbanded, torn over questions about the
use of force and facing an army ready to retaliate
against future action. Realizing their fears of democracy and despotism, Federalists were provided by
“Shays’ Rebellion” with the catalyst they needed to
advance their plan of a more powerful centralized
state. In May 1787, a collection of wealthy elites,
called by private invitation, met behind closed doors
and locked shutters to write a federal constitution
designed, in part, to prevent such popular protest by
“insur[ing] domestic tranquility.”
James Carrott
See also: Regulator Movement.
References
Bouton, Terry. 2000. “A Road Closed: Rural
Insurgency in Post-Independence Pennsylvania.”
Journal of American History 87 (3): 855–887.
Gross, Robert, ed. 1993. In Debt to Shays: The
Bicentennial of an Agrarian Rebellion.
Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
Szatmary, David. 1980. Shays’ Rebellion: The
Making of an Agrarian Insurgency. Amherst:
University of Massachusetts Press.

Silver Shirts
The League of the Silver Shirts was an avowedly fascist and antisemitic paramilitary organization active
in the United States in the period between the two
world wars. Created in 1933 by William Dudley Pelley (1890–1965), a Vermont novelist, newspaper editor, and onetime Hollywood scriptwriter, its activities peaked before Pelley’s presidential bid of 1936,
and had largely imploded by 1942 when Pelley was
653

Silver Shirts

imprisoned for sedition. Most of its membership
was concentrated on the West Coast and in the
Great Lakes region and numbered at most an estimated 15,000 members. The Silver Shirts stood for
a corporatist and communitarian program that was
modeled on Italian fascism. They also sympathized
with German National-Socialism and envisioned the
systematic eradication of Jewish power in finance,
politics, and culture, and the eventual reorganization of the United States as a “Christian Commonwealth.”
To explain and legitimate their radical program,
the Silver Shirts proffered various conspiracy theories and tried to produce an overarching, eclectic
conspiracist synthesis. This conspiracist synthesis
combined elements from various occult philosophies, from more traditional Christian millennialism, and from modern political, economic, and racist
antisemitism.
For most of its members, the Silver Shirts’ conspiracism was cohered by the radically dualist worldview of Christian millennialism. This conception of
historical time postulated a cosmic conspiracy by
satanic forces of evil, a continual conflict between
these forces and the Christian forces of good, and an
ultimate millennial victory by the Christian side.
Both of the two main types of Christian millennialism—pre- and postmillennialism—were interchangeably espoused by Pelley, who preached both
an imminent victory over the cosmic anti-Christian
conspiracy, presumably through the Silver Shirts’
militant agency, and a more distant, direct divine
intervention to establish a millennial theocracy.
Apparently rooted in Pelley’s own background as the
son of an itinerant Methodist minister, the millennialist theme provided the Silver Shirts’ public doctrine its least controversial and most widely appealing dimension. It would also appear to have been
the root of most of the Silver Shirts’ conspiracism,
for the majority of the movement’s members came
from traditional Christian Protestant backgrounds.
After an epiphanic out-of-body religious experience in 1928, however, Pelley radically decentered
traditional Christian millennialism and refocused his
own conspiracism through the influence of various
occult speculations. These were gathered especially
654

from Great Pyramidism and spiritualism but also
from Theosophism, Rosicrucianism, sexology, and
telepathy. Pelley professed to have received direct
“master messages” from Jesus, from various angelic
beings, and later also from the founder of Christian
Science, Mary Baker Eddy, and he claimed that
these messages had identified Jews and Communists as the primary actors of the millennial cosmic
conspiracy and exposed them as reincarnated
“demon” spirits. Spiritualist and Great Pyramidist
influences provided Pelley’s speculations further fixity, of a type unavailable to traditional Christian millennialists. By their means Pelley came to calculate
the precise future trajectories and timelines of the
conspiracy’s unfolding and coming destruction. He
settled eventually on 17 September 2001, as the
moment of millennial victory and Jewish defeat.
The fairly uniform public political doctrine that
was constructed out of these theoretical beliefs and
proffered by the Silver Shirts during the 1930s obscured Pelley’s personal occult beliefs and emphasized his more consensually held forms of antisemitic conspiracism. Thus the Silver Shirts claimed
that in the twentieth century the cosmic world conspiracy was embodied in the Illuminati, a secret
society founded in 1776 by Adam Weishaupt and
allegedly dominated by an inner core of Jewish conspirators. The Illuminati was portrayed as using
socialist, Communist, and liberal movements—as
well as finance capitalism, modernist religion, and
the “lower” races—as its tools in the undermining
“Christian” civilization that was to pave the way for
its own global domination. Consequently, most of
the Silver Shirts’ political effort was predicated on
an attempt to defuse and destroy the most important, overt manifestations of the alleged conspiracy—the New Deal, the Federal Reserve, international communism, the League of Nations, and,
above all, the purported financial, political, and cultural power of Jews of which all of these were
alleged aspects.
One of a number of religious and political mass
movements that in the 1930s assailed a putative
Jewish world conspiracy, the League of the Silver
Shirts was exceptionally driven by an eclectic, allinclusive conspiracism. Despite its relatively small

Skolnick, Sherman

numbers it played a significant role in molding
extremist opinion in the 1930s, as was attested to by
its suppression by the federal government. The
impact of their leader Pelley on the ideology of such
subsequent conspiracist and antisemitic movements as British-Israelism and Christian Identity
was also considerable, and provided a posthumous
influence that other similar movements of the
interwar period could not equal.
Markku Ruotsila
See also: Antisemitism; Illuminati; Millenarianism.
References
Barkun, Michael. 1997. Religion and the Racist
Right: The Origins of the Christian Identity
Movement. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press.
Lipset, Seymour Martin, and Earl Raab. The Politics
of Unreason: Right-Wing Extremism in America.
New York: Harper and Row.
Pelley, William D. 1929. My Seven Minutes in
Eternity with Their Aftermath. New York: Robert
Collier.
———. 1939. The Door to Revelation: An
Autobiography. Asheville, NC: Pelley Publishers.
Ribuffo, Leo P. 1983. The Old Christian Right: The
Protestant Far Right from the Great Depression
to the Cold War. Philadelphia: Temple University
Press.

Skolnick, Sherman
Sherman Skolnick reigns as the elder spokesperson
of the conspiracy mindset. For many years, he held
court at the River Flame restaurant outside of
Chicago, Illinois, circulating information about current affairs that barely makes it onto the Internet,
let alone the mainstream news. Although a paraplegic and wheelchair-bound since childhood, Skolnick has been exchanging information with friends
and contacts since the 1960s. Since the River Flame
days, he has developed an arsenal of alternative
broadcasting outlets. He founded his Committee to
Clean Up the Courts in 1963, and used it to mount
a successful legal challenge to court corruption in
Illinois. Skolnick began a news phone-line in 1971,
and since 1992 has served as the producer and
moderator of Broadsides, a Chicago-area, local access, cable-television talk show. The committee, the
phone line, and the cable show all still exist, and,

even at advanced age, Skolnick shows no sign of
slowing down.
Skolnick was first brought to national attention in
the 29 August 1969 edition of Time, which included
a photo of him being hoisted into a paddy wagon in
his wheelchair. His offense had been a contempt
citation in the aforementioned corruption proceedings, which successfully exposed influence-peddling
involving two Illinois supreme court justices. The
trial also launched the judicial career of John Paul
Stevens, who headed a special commission to investigate Skolnick’s claims, and now serves on the U.S.
Supreme Court. Stevens has since resisted court
rules limiting the petitioning rights of “in forma
pauperis” litigants like Skolnick.
Almost immediately after the conclusion of the
corruption case, however, Skolnick went on to investigate many other conspiracy-related facets of the
court and U.S. political life. He was arrested again
for violating a camera ban at the conspiracy trial of
the Chicago 7. He ferreted out details of a pre-Dallas Kennedy assassination plot in Chicago, using documents uncovered by a black Secret Service agent
named Abraham Bolden. In 1973 he demonstrated
to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)
that the probable reason for a crash at Chicago’s Midway Airport was sabotage, aimed against the wife of
E. Howard Hunt and eleven other Watergate figures. The NTSB nevertheless concluded that that
the crash was an accident due to pilot error.
During the 1990s, Skolnick did extensive interviewing of individuals connected to the Inslaw
affair, a scandal supposedly involving the theft by
members of the Reagan administration of a hightech tracking software known as PROMIS. Skolnick
also unearthed a great deal of information on connections between business interests of George
H. W. Bush and Iraqi president Saddam Hussein.
Although he has been criticized for allowing his
work to be used by outlets such as the Spotlight,
long seen as a crypto-fascist and antisemitic newspaper, rarely have the merits of his research work
been challenged successfully. Skolnick remains a
paradigm of the citizen-critic that many “conspiracy
theorists” strive to become.
Kenneth Thomas

655

Skull and Bones Society

See also: Chicago 7; Watergate.
References
Manaster, Kenneth A. 2001. Illinois Justice: The
Scandal of 1969 and the Rise of John Paul
Stevens. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Thomas, Kenneth, ed. 1995. “Sherman Skolnick
Sounds Off!” Pp. 273–280 in Popular Alienation:
A Steamshovel Press Reader. Lilburn, GA:
IllumiNet Press.
Website
Skolnick’s Reports: http://www.skolnicksreport.com.

Skull and Bones Society
Including among its members both President
George W. Bush and Monty Burns from The Simpsons, the Skull and Bones may be the most powerful
and most mythologized secret society left in the
twenty-first century United States. Known as “the
Order” to its initiates and housed in a windowless
crypt known as “the Tomb,” the Skull and Bones is
the oldest and most prestigious of Yale’s secret societies. Each year since its founding by William H.
Russell and Alphonso Taft in 1832, fifteen juniors
are selected, or “tapped,” to become members in
their senior year. Given its almost frighteningly elite
honor roll of members, and its long trail of rumors
and exposés, the Skull and Bones has been said to
run everything from the Bavarian Illuminati and the
New World Order, to the CIA and the East Coast
establishment. But whatever conspiratorial designs
one wishes to believe about this quite real secret
society, the Skull and Bones has long fulfilled its critical role of, in Ron Rosenbaum’s words, “converting
the idle progeny of the ruling class into morally serious leaders of the establishment.”
Secrets of “the Order”
It is said that members are required to leave the
room if they are ever asked about the Skull and
Bones. Nevertheless, lists of its most illustrious
members are readily available. They include political leaders such as the only president to become
chief justice of the Supreme Court, William Howard
Taft; Franklin D. Roosevelt’s secretary of war, Henry
Lewis Stimson; and three members of the Bush
clan: Prescott, George, Sr., and George W. Bush.
656

Yale has long been the center of CIA recruitment,
and a large segment of America’s foreign policy and
intelligence establishment has been shaped by
Bonesmen, including Kennedy’s national security
advisor McGeorge Bundy and his brother William,
who was a leader of both the CIA and the Council
on Foreign Relations; Hugh Cunningham, former
director of Clandestine Services for the CIA; and
Dino Pionzio, the CIA station chief in Chile during
the overthrow of Salvador Allende. Skull and Bones
members continue to be connected to every
“insider” and potentially sinister international society, including the Bilderberg group and the Trilateral Commission. In the world of business, the Skull
and Bones not only operates several major investment and law firms including Brown Brothers Harriman, but their members include Averell Harriman, Dean Witter, Harold Stanley, and Thomas
Daniels, founder of ADM (a large agricultural company). Other prominent Bonesmen include TimeLife founder and media tycoon Henry Luce and
conservative pundit William F. Buckley. Although its
membership has been overwhelmingly of a WASPRepublican type, the Skull and Bones was openminded enough to tap its first African American
member in 1949; its first Jewish members in the
1950s; and includes among its members the gay,
socialist literary critic F. O. Mathiessen, anti-Vietnam
activist William Sloane Coffin, and novelist John
Hersey (author of Hiroshima and The Conspiracy).
The rites of membership are among the Skull and
Bones’ most coveted secrets. It remains largely a
matter of conjecture whether or not the tapped are
forced to lie naked in a coffin, or what lies behind
the “Mystery of 322” (322 is supposedly the society’s
magic number, and also the number of the room
that forms the inner sanctum). Yet stories of the confessional and intensely intimate nature of the initiation rituals have been widely confirmed. Initiation is
said to consist of marathon sessions in which members tell their new brothers their life stories and provide, in excruciating detail, a complete record of
their most private sexual experiences. The contents
of the Tomb itself are also a source of mystery: it is
widely believed that Skull and Bones possesses the
skulls of Geronimo (procured by Prescott Bush) and

Skull and Bones Society

Inside this windowless tomb on the Yale campus many current and future members of the American ruling class
participate in a series of peculiar and still somewhat secret rituals to be inducted into the Skull and Bones, the oldest and
most powerful secret society in America today. (Michael Cohen)

Pancho Villa, both of which have caused public controversy. Among the rumored perks of membership
is a $15,000, no-strings-attached gift, plus a promise
that members will receive an income for life. For
fun and relaxation of the most exclusive kind, the
Skull and Bones maintains a members-only island
resort in the St. Lawrence River that is the site of
their annual retreats. But more than their undergraduate bonding in the crypt, the real benefits of
membership in the Order come after graduation,
through the society’s vast network of connections
and contacts within the U.S. ruling class. It is, of
course, here that the Skull and Bones ceases to be
an old and silly college fraternity and transmogrifies
into what many believe to be a nearly omnipotent
conspiracy.
Barbarians at the Gates
The Skull and Bones may have many traditions that
remain secret, but this is not due to a lack of trying

by curious and rebellious outsiders (referred to as
“barbarians” by Bonesmen). The first “raid” of the
Skull and Bones tomb occurred on 29 September
1876 when a small group, mockingly calling itself
the “Order of the File and Claw,” managed to break
into the “sanctum sanctorum.” Inside they found
occult symbols, plenty of skulls and bones, portraits
of the founders, and strange German slogans about
death and such (from which John Birch Society
types have concluded that the Skull and Bones is, in
fact, the second house of the Bavarian Illuminati).
The second major rash of break-ins occurred
nearly a century later as waves of radicalism and feminism swept over the Yale campus, leaving the
impression that the Skull and Bones was simply a
WASPish boys’ club irreparably in decline. John
Pogue, the writer and producer of the 2000 film The
Skulls, claimed to have infiltrated the Tomb during
his days as a Yale student in the 1980s. And in the latest violation of its sacred rituals, a team of students
657

Slave Power

armed with a night-vision camera and climbing
equipment managed to capture videotape footage of
the Skull and Bones’ melodramatic initiation rites,
filled with shrieking and mock violence in which a
member dressed up as George W. Bush can be heard
saying, “I’m gonna kill you like I did Al Gore!”
During George H. W. Bush’s run for the presidency in 1988, Bob Woodward (a member of competing Yale secret society Book and Snake) managed
to find several of Bush’s fellow Bonesmen who were
willing to talk openly about “the Order,” including
several (nonsexual) details of Bush’s life-story confessions. These members revealed that one of the two
men who were killed when Bush’s plane was shot
down in World War II was a member of Skull and
Bones, and that Bush grieved deeply for years with
this knowledge. As the first oil baron turned CIA
director to become president, Bush could not shake
the establishment aura of Yale and the Skull and
Bones, and during his reelection bid in 1992, the
reactionary-populist Pat Buchanan accused Bush of
“running a Skull and Bones presidency.”
However, no such slights or loose lips could be
found when it came time for the New Haven–born
Texan George W. Bush to make his bid for the
White House. In one campaign interview, George
W. refused to publicly admit that he was a member
and claimed not to know if the society still existed.
However, it is widely rumored around the Yale campus that George W. had his 1968 class of Skull and
Bones as guests in the White House shortly after
the inauguration to thank them for their assistance
and their silence. One can only imagine what they
might recall from his “bright college years.”
In 1991 another break-in of sorts occurred when
the Skull and Bones engaged in a semipublic debate
over the admission of women. Given the highly sexualized nature of the initiation rituals and the masculine bonding that members believe gives the Order
its cohesion and loyalty, many members bitterly
opposed the inclusion of women. However, the
Bonesmen finally voted to admit women, with an as
yet unknown modification to their rites and rituals.
At the start of the twenty-first century, with a
member in the White House, the Skull and Bones
continues to recruit a mix of the well-bred (George
658

W.’s daughter Barbara is certain to be tapped) with
the most forward thinking and brightest campus
leaders, thereby continuing to fulfill its self-ascribed
mission of reproducing the U.S. ruling class.
Michael Cohen
See also: Bush, George; Illuminati.
References
Rosembaum, Ron. 1977. “The Last Secrets of Skull
and Bones.” Pp. 154–172 in The Secret Parts of
Fortune. New York: Harper Perennial.

Slave Power
During the antebellum period, northerners opposed
to slavery feared that a small group of southern slaveholders was conspiring to gain control of the federal
government and use it to further southern slaveholding interests. These northerners argued that the
conspiracy sought to expand the South’s political
power at the expense of northern whites’ liberties.
The Republican Party, which developed during the
tense sectional politics of the 1850s, made the fullest
use of this argument. Its leading figures, such as
Charles Sumner, William Seward, and Joshua Giddings, were among the most active proponents of the
theory that a “Slave Power Conspiracy” existed in the
South. Their arguments asserted that this conspiracy
was committed to the defense of slavery and was an
aristocratic relic in democratic America, one that
failed to respect such basic rights as freedom of
speech, assembly, the press, and conscience. From
1845 to 1860, the number of northerners who came
to believe in the existence of the conspiracy increased considerably. Though there was no cabal of
slaveholders who actually tried to assume control of
the federal government, the words and actions of the
men of the slaveholding southern states led many
northerners to fear that such a conspiracy existed.
Fear of conspiracies had a historical precedent in
the United States, and was one of the reasons why
northerners gave credence to the Slave Power Conspiracy. They could refer to a number of conspiracy
theories believed to have threatened republican liberties in America. During the colonial era, England
had sought to deprive American colonists of their
liberties. After the Revolution, there were charges

Slave Power

that the Bavarian Illuminati sought to subvert the
American Republic. Federalists and Jeffersonian
Republicans traded allegations that the other party
sought to sell out the new nation to either Great
Britain or France. Burr’s conspiracy of 1804, fear of
Masonic subterfuge in the 1820s and 1830s, and the
suspected designs of the Catholic Church were
three more examples of alleged conspiracies in the
midst of republican America (Davis, 3–31).
Antislavery northerners could not agree upon the
number of southern members of the conspiracy.
William Seward believed there were 350,000 southerners involved, but Gamaliel Bailey included all
family members of slaveholders and thus came up
with the figure of 2 million. Other proponents of
the “Slave Power” theory included in the count
northerners who had business relationships or political sympathies with the slaveholding South.
Despite these varying estimates, all agreed that the
political power of this conspiracy was considerable
as it drew upon the wealthiest, most politically
influential segment of southern society (Gienapp).
Members of the “Slave Power” shared a belief in
several principles. First, they accepted the premise
of the “positive good” argument about slavery, believing that slavery lifted the African out of savagery and
heathenism and turned him into a Christian servant,
cheerfully laboring for a kindly master who then
cared for the slave in his declining years. Second,
these slaveholders believed that they had a right to
own the labor, as well as the bodies, of their slaves.
Third, the slaveholders argued that slavery was legal
and constitutional. They believed that nothing in the
Constitution precluded the ownership of slaves; in
fact, they asserted that the Constitution protected
their ownership of slaves through the protection of
private property afforded by the Fifth Amendment,
which protects life, liberty, and property from state
seizure without due process. They asserted that slavery was largely a state matter, regulated by individual
states, which supported the institution through the
creation of elaborate slave codes (Nye, 293).
Origins of the Conspiracy
Abolitionists were the first group to make the charge
that a “Slave Power” existed. Their postal campaign

of 1835, which sent abolitionist literature to southern slaveholders, and petition drives, which inundated Congress with abolitionist petitions, drew the
immediate ire of southern whites. President Andrew
Jackson instructed southern postmasters not to
deliver this literature. In 1836, the House of Representatives, under pressure from southerners,
adopted the “gag rule,” which tabled without discussion all abolitionist petitions sent to that body. Protection of slavery superseded protection of First
Amendment rights for northerners. Abolitionists
began to publicize these attacks on the liberties of
northern whites, and this proved to be an effective
strategy that would pay dividends in later decades.
Though abolitionists began to use the concept of
the “Slave Power” around 1835, some abolitionists
and northern politicians went back to the beginning of the federal government to seek the origins
of the “Slave Power.” They discovered the roots of
the problem in some of the compromises made at
the Constitutional Convention of 1787. These
compromises included the three-fifths clause,
which gave the South additional political power; a
provision for a fugitive slave law, later passed in
1793, which obligated northern states to return
runaway slaves to their original states; and the
twenty-year extension of the international slave
trade until 1808 (Wilson 1872, 1: 39–56).
The Missouri Crisis of 1819–1821 reawakened
fears of the expansion of slavery among many northerners. Missouri was part of the Louisiana Purchase
and lay on the west bank of the Mississippi River,
where it served as the gateway to the western territories. Northern concerns included the damaging
effect of slavery on the free labor economy of the
western territories, the preservation of western
lands for white non-slaveholding men, the failure of
the United States to live up to the ideals enshrined
in the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution, the growth of southern political power, and
the growing opposition to the institution of slavery.
The Tallmadge Amendment, proposed by James
Tallmadge, sought to ban the further importation of
slaves into Missouri and to begin the process of
gradual emancipation in that state. The Missouri
Compromise of 1820, however, permitted Missouri
659

Slave Power

to form a state government without regard to slavery, but it also created a geographic line at 36°30'
north latitude (the southern boundary of Missouri)
above which slavery could not expand into the
remainder of the Louisiana Purchase. It also admitted Maine into the union, thus preserving the sectional balance between free and slave states.
The next major event that contributed to the fear
of a “Slave Power Conspiracy” was the Texas annexation issue of 1845. Texas had gained its independence from Mexico in 1836, but U.S. presidents had
rebuffed Texans’ requests for annexation. Fear of
war with Mexico and sectional discord at home over
the slavery issue were the deciding factors in those
decisions. There was an equal number of free and
slave states in the Union, and Texas, which would be
a slave state, threatened to disrupt this balance of
power. John Tyler, hoping to win reelection in 1844,
used the issue of Texas annexation as a political tool.
His reelection bid failed, but Texas entered the
Union as a slave state in 1845. Some extreme northerners, such as John Smith Dye, charged that John
C. Calhoun led the plot to annex Texas, and when
President William Henry Harrison refused to assent
to the plan, the president died of an illness that
resembled arsenic poisoning. Calhoun claimed
Tyler, the recently inaugurated vice-president, was
fully in agreement with Calhoun’s plan, pointing to
the fact that Tyler appointed Calhoun secretary of
state and several years later, Texas was a slave state.
However, this interpretation left out two key points:
first, the United States had long sought Texas, and
second, the United States feared that Great Britain
might form an alliance with Texas, a diplomatic
move that would have derailed the expansionist
goals of Manifest Destiny (Dye cited in Davis, 7–8).
The annexation of Texas helped pave the way for a
war with Mexico, a war that antislavery northerners
believed to be motivated by southern slaveholders
bent on the acquisition of more territory for slavery
south of 36°30'. During this war, David Wilmot, a
Democrat from Pennsylvania, proposed an amendment to a spending bill that demanded that slavery
not be permitted to spread into any territories that
the United States might acquire from Mexico. The
amendment, known as the Wilmot Proviso, attracted
660

great support among northern Democrats and
Whigs, and passed in the House of Representatives,
thanks to a northern majority in that chamber. The
amendment died in the Senate, where the two sections enjoyed parity. The Wilmot Proviso thus went
the way of the Tallmadge Amendment, supported in
the House but rejected in the Senate. Antislavery
northerners chalked up this defeat to southern political power aided by its northern allies.
The Growing Threat of “Slave Power”
Out of the Mexican War came the Mexican Cession,
which gave the United States a massive addition of
land in the southwest and along the Pacific coast.
When the territory of California asked to be admitted into the Union as a free state in 1850, southerners feared the loss not only of valuable territory but
also of political power. California’s entry into the
Union would tilt the balance of power in the Senate
in the North’s favor and fierce debates erupted in
Congress. Out of the sectional bitterness emerged
the Compromise of 1850, which allowed California
to become a free state and also resulted in a new
Fugitive Slave Law. This law concerned many northerners because it placed the national government in
the position of aiding the recapture of fugitive
slaves. Federal marshals could require any northerner to aid in a search for runaway slaves, without
regard to northern citizens’ feelings about slavery.
The law also stripped the accused fugitive of the
rights of habeas corpus, trial by jury, and testifying
on his or her own behalf. Abolitionists used these
features of the law to argue their case to good effect,
warning that what happened to the accused fugitive
slaves could happen to free white men. They also
warned that slaveholders wished to spread slavery
throughout the nation and the Americas.
In the 1850s, many antislavery northerners grew
concerned about growing ties between southern
expansionists and the national government and the
possible addition of new slave states to the union.
One such example of these close ties was the Ostend
Manifesto (1854). Three U.S. ministers met in
Ostend, Belgium, and issued this manifesto, which
declared that Spanish claims to Cuba were unnatural and that Spain ought to sell the island to the

Slave Power

United States. The manifesto asserted that the
United States should seize Cuba if it failed in its
efforts to purchase it from Spain. At this time there
were also several efforts led by southern filibusters
to establish U.S. control over Cuba and Nicaragua.
Fears of presidential support for these ventures
were greatly exaggerated, as the actions taken by the
administrations of Presidents Franklin Pierce and
James Buchanan to disavow them or to halt filibustering expeditions attested (May).
Northern fears of southern expansionism were
not limited to overseas activities. There was even
greater concern that slavery would spread to the
western territories. When Senator Stephen Douglas of Illinois proposed the Kansas-Nebraska Act in
1853, which would create territories through which
a transcontinental railroad would be constructed,
he needed southern support in order to win its passage. Douglas seized upon the idea of popular sovereignty, which allowed the residents of a territory
to determine if it would be slave or free. Since the
territories in question lay north of the Missouri
Compromise line, Douglas’s proposal meant the
repeal of the 1820 line. The Kansas-Nebraska Act
passed Congress in 1854, but led to increased fear
of the existence of the “Slave Power Conspiracy.”
Both North and South sent settlers to Kansas, the
territory most likely to become a slave state, to determine the territory’s free or slave status. After a fraudulent ballot, in which Missouri “border ruffians” illegally cast ballots, a proslavery government began in
Lecompton. Under the proslavery constitution, men
who espoused antislavery opinions lost their right to
vote, while supporters of slavery from outside the
territory could vote, as long as they swore to support
the Fugitive Slave Law and the Kansas-Nebraska Act
and paid a dollar on election day. Newspapers that
opposed slavery committed a felony and their editors
faced imprisonment, while the death penalty awaited
those who helped slaves escape (Cairnes, 229–230).
Free-state Kansans established a rival government in
Topeka and during the ensuing impasse, Kansas
descended into a civil war. Proslavery forces “sacked”
the free-state town of Lawrence in May 1856, an
action widely reported in northern newspapers sympathetic to the new Republican Party, whose stated

goal was to halt the western expansion of slavery in
the territories. These accounts strengthened the conviction that the Slave Power was at work, attempting
to spread slavery into Kansas by any means possible.
Additional evidence of the willingness of the “Slave
Power” to use violence to defend slavery occurred
that same week in Washington when Representative
Preston Brooks of South Carolina assaulted Senator
Charles Sumner of Massachusetts. Sumner had spoken against the outrages in Kansas, slavery, and the
defenders of slavery, including Senator Andrew Butler, Brooks’s uncle. Brooks hit Sumner on the head
with a cane several times and inflicted serious injuries
that kept Sumner from his Senate duties for two and
a half years. Southern newspapers and popular opinion defended this attack. These defenses prompted
renewed fears in the North that the civil liberties and
physical safety of slavery’s opponents were in grave
peril.
From the Dred Scott Case to Secession
In 1857, the Supreme Court decided the case of
Dred Scott v. Sanford. The court decided that Dred
Scott, a slave from Missouri, could not sue because
he was not a citizen, and that blacks could never be
citizens, that slaves were constitutionally protected
property, and therefore that Congress could not regulate or restrict slavery in the territories. The Missouri Compromise of 1820 and popular sovereignty
were declared unconstitutional and thus the case
opened the way for the expansion of slavery throughout the territories. Many Republicans accused President James Buchanan, who had discussed the case
with several justices before his inauguration, and the
Supreme Court of conspiring with the Slave Power
to bring about this outcome. This conclusion was
untrue as the Supreme Court was bitterly divided
over the case and Buchanan’s remarks about the
impending decision were typed before he spoke with
the justices at his inauguration (Potter, 287–289).
Notwithstanding, many northerners now feared that
the next step of the Supreme Court would be to
strike down northern state laws that forbade slavery’s
existence, thus nationalizing slavery.
Buchanan became the focus of another struggle
involving the “Slave Power” in 1858 when he pre661

Slave Revolts

sented the Lecompton Constitution to Congress
and defended it as the will of the people of Kansas.
Voters in Kansas had overwhelmingly rejected the
proposed constitution, but Buchanan asserted that
Kansas was a slave state and that free-state forces
were disloyal. To deny Kansas admission to the
union as a slave state, he asserted, would anger the
South. Republicans denounced Buchanan as a willing tool of the “Slave Power,” and charged that
southerners sought a slave state to counterbalance
California and restore a sectional balance of power.
In the end, with the aid of Stephen Douglas, Congress rejected the Lecompton Constitution. Kansas
would eventually join the Union as a free state during the presidency of Abraham Lincoln.
In the late 1850s, strong sentiment for reopening
the African slave trade emerged in the cotton-producing states of the Deep South. Supporters of this
movement claimed that the 1808 prohibition was
unconstitutional and a response to northern antislavery fanaticism. Defenders of this policy argued
that additional slaves would give the South greater
political power in the House of Representatives,
where the three-fifths clause held sway, and restore
a sectional balance of power (Cairnes, 239–245).
The last great act of the “Slave Power” was secession from the Union, beginning with South Carolina on 20 December 1860. Slaveholders feared
that the new Republican administration of President Lincoln, elected in 1860, would embrace an
abolitionist policy toward slavery in the South.
What began as an effort to protect slavery from government interference ended in failure as the Confederacy lost the Civil War. The Emancipation
Proclamation and the Thirteenth Amendment put
an end to slavery and fears of a “Slave Power.”
James C. Foley
See also: Anti-Masonic Party; Brown, John; Burr,
Aaron; Fugitive Slave Act; Illuminati.
References
Ashworth, John. 1996. “Free Labor, Wage Labor,
and the Slave Power: Republicanism and the
Republican Party in the 1850s.” Pp. 128–146 in
The Market Revolution in America: Social,
Political, and Religious Expressions, 1800–1880,
ed. Melvyn Stokes and Stephen Conway.
Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.

662

Cairnes, John Elliott. [1862] 1969. The Slave Power:
Its Character, Career, and Probable Designs:
Being an Attempt to Explain the Real Issues
Involved in the American Contest. Edited with an
Introduction by Harold D. Woodman. New York:
Harper and Row.
Davis, David Brion. 1969. The Slave Power
Conspiracy and the Paranoid Style. Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press.
Dye, John Smith. 1866. History of the Plots and
Crimes of the Great Conspiracy to Overthrow
Liberty in America. New York: Published by the
Author.
Gienapp, William E. 1986. “The Republican Party
and the Slave Power.” Pp. 51–78 in New
Perspectives on Race and Slavery in America:
Essays in Honor of Kenneth M. Stampp, ed.
Robert H. Abzug and Stephen E. Maizlish.
Lexington: University Press of Kentucky.
May, Robert E. 1997. “The Slave Power Conspiracy
Revisited: United States Presidents and
Filibustering, 1848–1861.” Pp. 7–28 in Union and
Emancipation: Essays on Politics and Race in the
Civil War Era, ed. David W. Blight and Brooks
D. Simpson. Kent, OH: Kent State University
Press.
Nye, Russel B. 1963. Fettered Freedom: Civil
Liberties and the Slavery Controversy,
1860–1860. East Lansing: Michigan State
University Press.
Potter, David M. 1976. The Impending Crisis,
1848–1861. Completed and edited by Don E.
Fehrenbacher. New York: Harper and Row.
Rawley, James A. 1969. Race and Politics: “Bleeding
Kansas” and the Coming of the Civil War. New
York: J. B. Lippincott Company.
Richards, Leonard L. 2000. The Slave Power: The
Free North and Southern Domination,
1780–1860. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
University Press.
Sewell, Richard H. 1976. Ballots for Freedom:
Antislavery Politics in the United States,
1837–1860. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wilson, Henry. 1872–1877. History of the Rise and
Fall of the Slave Power in America. 3 vols.
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin and Company.

Slave Revolts
Although there is disagreement among scholars
about the actual level of rebelliousness among slaves,
most agree that during the slaveholding era there

Slave Revolts

was widespread white fear about slave revolts. Looking at similar time periods and using remarkably similar definitions of what constitutes a slave conspiracy
(more than one conspirator involved, freedom as the
motivating factor, and contemporaneous recognition
of the conspiracy as a conspiracy), scholars have
come up with widely varying numbers of historical
instances of revolts throughout U.S. history. While
one historian claims to have found records of
“approximately two hundred and fifty revolts and
conspiracies” (Aptheker, 162), another asserts that
only nine major insurrections occurred (Blassingame, 125).
However, while people might disagree about how
many slave conspiracies actually occurred, almost
everyone agrees that the fear of such revolts was
almost universal in the United States. This is because slave insurrections had more impact on U.S.
culture as an idea—“If slaves in Charleston can
burn down homes and kill their masters, what is to
stop them from doing it here in Savannah?”—than
as actual events. Although tragedies for all involved
personally—both white and black—slave conspiracies in the United States were fairly limited in the
scope of their activities. All of them were quickly
contained by the better-armed, better-equipped
white slavocracy. Like all conspiracies, then, U.S.
slave revolts had greater potential energy than
kinetic energy. The number of people affected by
the paranoia of slave conspiracy was far greater than
those ever personally affected by the actual violence
of those conspiracies. This anxiety permeating the
United States before 1865 certainly makes slave
conspiracies one of the most significant cultural
phenomena of pre–Civil War America.
Looking at the entire history of slave revolts in
the United States, it is easy to generalize some conditions that proved fecund ground for the development of slave conspiracies. These certainly aren’t
the only historical circumstances responsible for the
development of insurrections. They each, however,
contributed significantly to the development of an
atmosphere that allowed many slaves to dream of
freedom through conspiratorial means.
The first condition involves the number of black
citizens in the community that were not slaves. For

slave owners, free blacks and maroons—runaway
slaves who lived in nearby swamps, mountains, or
other inaccessible areas—were the greatest dangers
for fostering slave unrest. The presence of free
blacks in the community gave slaves a reason to continue to hope and strive toward freedom. They also
often served as a resource for conspiracies in terms
of weapons, money, or sanctuary. Escaped slaves
often created maroon communities where runaway
slaves could find a home. Often these communities
could exist for years hidden in hard-to-reach areas.
Such havens were beacons of hope for would-be
slave conspirators, serving not only as potential sanctuary but also as additional fighting forces when the
time for insurrection came.
Another condition that the slavocracy feared was a
disproportionate growth in the black population compared to the white population. As the South began to
produce crops—cotton, sugar, and tobacco—that
made slavery more profitable, more slaves meant
more profit. However, this led to a larger growth in
the black population compared to the whites of many
southern communities. The anxiety on the part of
white Southerners living in counties where they were
outnumbered by their black slaves cannot be overestimated. Such superiority of numbers also gave many
slave conspirators hope that they might succeed
where so many had failed.
A third condition that greatly increased the potential for slave conspiracies was economic downturns.
When the economy worsened, the slave owners had
to tighten their collective belts, and one of the first
places that they would cut their expenses was the
money they spent on and for their slaves. Consequently, people who never had much at the best of
times had even less food and clothing and had to
work harder. This periodic worsening of conditions
often turned slaves into conspirators looking for an
escape.
Another cultural condition that encouraged slave
insurrections was the circulation of a revolutionary
rhetoric in the public sphere. While often unrelated
specifically to the situation of U.S. slaves, such discourse served as a spark to start many conspirators
thinking of freedom. The late eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries saw an explosion of revolu663

Slave Revolts

tionary thought completely reevaluating the fundamental rights of all people, resulting most famously
in the American and French Revolutions. This new
discourse of freedom and equality obviously spoke
eloquently to slaves in bondage. As the American
community as a whole pulsed with such talk, slaves
expected to see their own situations improve.
Hadn’t Jefferson said, “All men are created equal”?
Such discourse was followed by successful slave
revolts in the Caribbean and Latin America, most
spectacularly in Haiti. This news of successful slave
conspiracies in addition to the general discourse of
revolution certainly gave inspiration to many unsuccessful conspirators in the United States.
Last, slave revolts relied upon sympathetic whites
as a resource. These whites were in a position to provide much to nascent conspiracies, including
weapons and the hope that some of the white community would support the freedom of the conspiring
slaves. While there is a danger of oversimplification
to generalize about the motivations of these white
supporters of slave revolts, some interesting similarities do suggest themselves. Most of them were poor
southerners who apparently saw slavery as an act of
class warfare as much as an act of racism. George
Boxley, a Virginian, is a good example of this phenomenon. In 1816, he helped foster a slave revolt
and actively took part in the violence. According to
an official at the time, Boxley had openly declared
that “the distinction between the rich and the poor
was too great” and this was his motivation for the
insurrection (Aptheker, 255). George Boxley and
other white conspirators in slave revolts suggest a
very interesting reading of slavery as a battle between
the rich and the poor instead of the whites and the
blacks, a reading that seems to have largely fallen out
of post–Civil War discourse about slavery.
Faced with these numerous slave insurrections,
how did the white slavocracy respond to these
threats? It deployed many tools to help maintain the
status quo, some of them more obvious and violent
than others. The first weapon deployed by slave owners at any sign of conspiracy was a show of force. The
most obvious and most direct form of white control
over slaves was physical. Chains prevented movement of suspected slave conspirators and nooses,
664

whips, and other devices wrote the white power
directly on the bodies of slaves for all would-be conspirators to read. There was no doubt what would
happen to failed slave revolutionaries. Another form
of that force was state-sponsored: the military. Every
patrol, every fort, every militia showed slaves that
their owners were not the only ones concerned with
maintaining the status quo of slavery. The state itself
in the form of military bodies patrolled to control
possible slave rebellions.
Another way in which the state showed its participation in maintaining slavery was its passage of
innumerable laws that regulated every conceivable
activity in which slaves might participate. With
every major slave conspiracy that was discovered,
more laws would be passed, attempting even
stricter control of the lives of slaves. Almost as soon
as the military was dispatched the legislature of the
state facing the conspiracy would go to work, crafting laws to further control the movements of free
blacks, limiting the importation of slaves, increasing
the penalties for rebellion, and further curtailing
the movements of slaves off of their master’s property. In this way, the state attempted to contain
slave conspiracy through sword and pen.
A third method of attempting to derail slave
revolts was by creating dissension within the black
community itself. In order to create divisions among
the slaves, slave owners created different classes
within slave society. They did this by treating male
slaves differently from female slaves; by treating
house slaves differently from field hands. By making
some slaves the personal servants of their masters,
often from an early age, they could create a more
intimate bond between the servant and master. This
proved very successful since the personal servants of
whites often proved the downfall of slave conspiracies by informing on nascent insurrections.
A fourth approach the slavocracy took to control
slave insurrections was to attempt to control the ratio
of blacks to whites in any given community. White
slave owners considered a disproportionate growth
in the black versus the white population as one of the
greatest dangers to inspire would-be conspirators,
and so they attempted to limit that ratio to ensure
that blacks never became too big a percentage of the

Slave Revolts

overall population. One way they attempted this was
by promoting recolonization plans for free blacks.
While returning blacks to Africa might seem to be a
movement inspired by abolitionists, it actually was
embraced by southern slave owners who saw it as a
way to remove free blacks from their communities
and thereby remove potential conspirators from their
midst. Various states—even southern ones—also enacted laws to limit the importation of slaves, thus
hoping to limit the numbers of the black population.
The slavocracy also promoted all plans for the
national annexation of land such as Florida or
Louisiana. The South was a huge supporter of the
Mexican War, for example, because it hoped to dilute
the high concentration of potential conspirators in its
midst. By shipping off enough slaves to any newly
acquired areas, slave owners hoped to water down
the black population proportionate to the white population and thus discourage insurrection.
Last, the slavocracy hoped to control future slave
conspiracies by limiting the public discussion of any
past conspiracies. Fearing copycat conspiracies,
southern states radically limited publication of stories
of slave revolts. Because of this official censorship, it
is extremely difficult for current-day scholars to know
how many conspiracies actually existed and how
many insurrections occurred. Although public discussion of these events was officially discouraged—
except after the violence of Nat Turner’s Rebellion—
many accounts of these slave conspiracies are found
in private venues—letters and diaries, for example.
Why did slave revolts have some dramatic successes in other parts of the Americas—Latin America and the Caribbean—while slave conspirators in
the United States never succeeded? There are at
least four reasons that allowed Toussaint L’Ouverture’s Haitian insurrection to succeed while Nat
Turner’s Virginia rebellion failed. First, there were
greater numbers of potential conspirators in Latin
America and the Caribbean compared to slave owners than in the United States. The ratio of black to
white was as high as 7 to 1 in the British West Indies,
11 to 1 in Haiti, and 20 to 1 in Surinam. This huge
disparity in numbers was a weapon that slaves in the
United States never had. While disparate numbers in
population growth was a danger sign for slave owners

in the South, they never had to worry about such
odds. Second, nineteenth-century Latin America
didn’t have the infrastructure for transportation and
communication that the United States did. On top of
this, most Latin American plantations had even
closer proximity to dense jungles, impenetrable
swamps, and unassailable mountains for runaway
slaves to hide in. Thus their problems with maroon
communities and isolation made their situation
much more dangerous than that of the slavocracy of
the United States. Third, unlike the United States,
both regions had a chronic shortage of a military
presence. This made it nearly impossible to impress
the slaves with the power and ubiquity of a state-supported slavocracy in Latin America. Consequently,
would-be conspirators there were more emboldened
by this lack of a show of force. Last, since a slave conspiracy never succeeded in the United States, potential conspirators always had to face a history of futility when planning their rebellions. This might well
have stopped many potential conspirators from joining the ranks of rebels.
Riley Vann
References
Aptheker, Herbert. 1943. American Negro Slave
Revolts. New York: Columbia University Press.
Blassingame, John W. 1972. The Slave Community:
Plantation Life in the Antebellum South. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Genovese, Eugene D. 1979. From Rebellion to
Revolution: Afro-American Slave Revolts in the
Making of the Modern World. Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press.
Hinks, Peter P. 1997. To Awaken My Afflicted
Brethren: David Walker and the Problem of
Antebellum Slave Resistance. University Park:
Pennsylvania State University Press.
McKivigan, John R., and Stanley Harrold, eds. 1999.
Antislavery Violence: Sectional, Racial, and
Cultural Conflict in Antebellum America.
Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.
Rossbach, Jeffrey S. 1982. Ambivalent Conspirators:
John Brown, the Secret Six, and a Theory of Slave
Violence. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press.
Sale, Maggie Montesinos. 1997. The Slumbering
Volcano: American Slave Ship Revolts and the
Production of Rebellious Masculinity. Durham,
NC: Duke University Press.

665

Smith, Gerald L. K.

Smith, Gerald L. K.
From the 1940s until his death in 1976 Gerald
Lyman Kenneth Smith was one of the most outspoken and prolific antisemitic conspiracy theorists in
the United States. Smith stands out, not so much
for the originality, quality, or even the consistency of
his ideas, but rather for his ability to communicate
them.
Born in Pardeeville, Wisconsin, in 1898, Smith
was the scion of a fundamentalist Christian family
who adhered to a literal interpretation of the Bible
based upon the New Testament. After graduating
from university in 1922, Smith became a preacher
and, following a meteoric rise through a succession
of ministries in the Midwest, arrived in Shreveport,
Louisiana, during the 1929 Stock Market Crash.
Thereafter Smith rose to prominence as the charismatic chief lieutenant to Huey P. Long, the demagogic governor of Louisiana, on whose behalf he ran
the Share Our Wealth organization, which gave him
access to its 200,000-strong mailing list, his most
vital asset in future years. However, when Long was
assassinated in 1935, Smith proved incapable of rallying his political legacy.
Shedding his populist support for the New Deal,
Smith became increasingly led by antisemitic conspiracy theories, veering rightward and fiercely criticizing President Roosevelt. In 1937 Smith formed
the Committee of One Million as a vehicle for his
alternative brand of Christian “Americanism.” By
1942 the organization had brought Smith 3 million
followers and an impressive range of influential and
wealthy backers, including Henry Ford, who shared
his analysis of the impending danger of “Jewish
Communism,” which mirrored that of Protocols of
the Elders of Zion. As his admiration for Nazism
grew, Smith briefly joined William Dudley Pelley’s
Silver Shirts. He was also associated with Dr. Francis Townsend and Father Charles E. Coughlin, the
antisemitic “radio priest,” with whom he founded
the Union Party and which made him a truly
national figure. However, Smith was expelled from
the party in 1942 because of his allegedly disruptive
behavior. That same year Smith went public with
the “call” he had received to save Christian America
from the “enemies of Christ.”
666

Smith’s obstreperous support of the Dies Committee’s investigation of “un-American” activities
ensured that, unlike many less prominent antisemites, he escaped indictment during the Grand
Sedition Trial in 1944. Unscathed, Smith reemerged
after the war at the head of the Christian Nationalist
Party (CNP), envisaged as a continuation of the isolationist America First Party upon whose founder,
Captain Earl Southard, Smith had exerted considerable influence. The CNP was complemented by the
formation in 1947 of his personal vehicle, the Christian Nationalist Crusade (CNC), whose mouthpiece,
Cross and Flag, drew upon the Committee of One
Million’s all-important subscription lists. Smith’s tireless evangelizing was remarkably successfully in
weaving together Judaism, communism, and civil
rights as part of one vast conspiracy, which he traced
back to the Order of the Illuminati. However, while
this gave the politics of McCarthyism an added antisemitic dimension, Smith never regained his prewar
stature.
Although he continued his wide-ranging correspondence with many public figures, his antisemitism, not to mention his personal idiosyncrasies,
had effectively pushed him beyond the pale. His
once powerful voice continued to be muted by the
American Jewish Committee’s (AJC) policy of
“dynamic silence,” which effectively smothered his
access to the media by depriving him of publicity.
Smith retired to Eureka Springs, Arkansas, in the
late 1960s where, despite the objections of the AJC,
he built a religious theme park centered upon a
seven-story statue of Jesus, Christ of the Ozarks.
Smith died and was buried at the foot of this crumbling edifice in 1976, the title of his posthumously
published autobiography, Besieged Patriot, an
unconscious commentary on his subsequent descent
into political oblivion.
However, despite this litany of personal failure
his longevity ensured that Smith provided a formative influence for successive generations of far-right
activists whose influence continues to resonate
today. Having moved to Los Angeles in 1953 Smith,
the CNC, and its youth movement became the
organizational focus for a burgeoning clique of
Christian Identity preachers centered in Southern

Society of the Cincinnati

California. Paradoxically derived from some elements of philosemitic British Israelitism, the vehemently antisemitic theology of Christian Identity
believes that Christians, not Jews, are God’s “chosen people,” the true descendants of Abraham,
while Jews are viewed as the literal “seed of Satan”
descended from Cain, the progeny of an unholy
union between Eve and Satan in the Garden of
Eden. At a stroke, world history became the titanic
struggle between two diametrically opposed bloodlines representing good and evil, Aryan and Jew,
God and the Devil.
While Smith played a prominent role in popularizing Christian Identity and linking it to political
extremism, he was not responsible for the antisemitic perversion of British Israelite theology. This
had occurred earlier under the influence of
Howard Rand and William J. Cameron, the latter
the editor of Henry Ford’s infamous Dearborn
Independent. Smith’s importance for the evolution
of Christian Identity is to be judged not by his ideas,
but by the coherence of the sophisticated modern
propaganda network that he bestowed upon its
adherents. Indeed, many influential Christian Identity preachers like Wesley Swift, who often accompanied Smith on his speaking tours and acted as his
bodyguard, first achieved prominence through
CNC-sponsored Bible lectures. This ideological
transmission traveled both ways and Swift appears
to have had a powerful reciprocal influence on
Smith, whom he introduced to the fundamental
“truth” of Christian Identity. In this respect Smith
held a position of pivotal importance, forming a
personal and ideological bridge between the traditions of Depression-era antisemitism and the violent neo-Nazi groups of the 1970s like Aryan
Nations and the Christian Defense League, whose
leaders saw themselves as heirs to Swift’s ministry
and, by implication, to that of Smith himself.
Graham D. Macklin
See also: Coughlin, Father Charles; Ford, Henry;
Illuminati; Long, Huey; Protocols of the Elders of
Zion; Silver Shirts.
References
Barkun, Michael. 1997. Religion and the Racist
Right: The Origins of the Christian Identity

Movement. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press.
Jeansonne, Glen. 1986. “Combating Anti-Semitism:
The Case of Gerald L. K. Smith.” Pp. 152–167 in
Anti-Semitism in American History, ed. David A.
Gerber. Urbana and Chicago: University of
Illinois Press.
———. 1988. Gerald L. K. Smith: Minister of Hate.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Society of the Cincinnati
The Society of the Cincinnati was founded in May
1783 as an association of veteran Revolutionary War
officers; it quickly became the focus of a conspiracy
theory in which the society was accused of trying to
establish a hereditary aristocracy in the United
States. In spring 1783, the last months of the existence of the Continental Army, a group of officers
surrounding Major General Henry Knox and Major
General Friedrich von Steuben planned a way to
continue the friendship and solidarity of Revolutionary War commanders in peacetime. The aim
was twofold: first of all, Knox and the others envisioned a mutual aid and benefit association, which
could help impoverished members as well as the
widows and orphans of deceased comrades. Second, the officer corps had important political interests in common: Congress had promised to convert officers’ pensions into a lump sum equal to five
years’ pay, a policy known as commutation. However, the precarious financial situation of the United
States made the payment of commutation dubious,
a problem that had already figured prominently in
the so-called Newburgh conspiracy. Many officers
supported the formation of a stronger national government that was more likely to be able to honor its
obligations. As a result, the planned association of
veteran officers could also function as a political
pressure group.
Knox and the others chose as their patron Cincinnatus, a Roman general who had briefly assumed
dictatorial power only to return to his plow as
quickly as possible. They planned a Society of the
Cincinnati on the federal level as well as state societies, annual meetings, a badge of honor, the possibility of admitting foreign and honorary members,
667

Society of the Cincinnati

and the continuation of membership through the
oldest male descendant. In its early months, the
society was virtually unknown to the general populace, but officers joined in large numbers and state
societies were founded, including a French society.
George Washington, although uninvolved with the
organization of the society, was elected its president.
On the state level, typically the highest-ranking officer from the state line became the society’s leader.
On the whole, the Cincinnati were quite successful
at organizing veteran officers from the various
states, making the society one of the very few associations existing in the entire United States.
Both the political and the organizational aspects
of the society came under attack throughout the
1780s. American tradition, especially in the wake of
the Revolution, included a deep distrust of standing
armies, special privilege, and aristocracy; the
Cincinnati seemed to include elements of all three.
In New England, extralegal conventions protested
commutation as a policy designed to privilege a specific class of citizens over others; the society became
the focal point of these accusations. In South Carolina, Judge Aedanus Burke published a widely read
pamphlet that described the society as a nascent
nobility. While Burke acknowledged the heroism of
the veteran officers, he feared that their descendants would be less virtuous and eventually constitute an aristocracy that would doom republican government. A conspiracy theory emerged that saw the
Cincinnati as a group bent on gaining special financial privileges through commutation; forming an
aristocracy through the rule of descent, connected
to the nobility of Europe through the membership
of foreign officers like Steuben and the French society; meeting annually to make political decisions,
and then enforcing those decisions through political
influence and implicit military power. In short, the
Cincinnati were seen as the nucleus of a secret government, operating outside republican rules, to the
benefit of the few and the detriment of the many.
The Cincinnati and the Constitution
To combat these allegations, Washington—spurred
on by criticism from Thomas Jefferson and John
Adams—convinced the society to drop the heredi668

tary clause and honorary memberships, and put
their funds under the control of the state legislatures in 1784. This measure temporarily quieted
criticism, but the topic soon flared up again. In
1787, the Cincinnati were suspected of fomenting
Shays’ Rebellion only to put it down, in order to
impress upon the populace the need for a stronger
national government. That same year, the annual
meeting of the society took place in Philadelphia, at
the same time and city as the Federal Convention
that drafted the Constitution. Given Washington’s
position as president of the Cincinnati and chairman of the Federal Convention, and the fact that
several delegates were also members of the society,
there was ample room for suspicions. During the
debates about the ratification of the Constitution,
radical Anti-Federalists repeatedly charged that the
new political system was the work of the Cincinnati,
a new attempt to establish an aristocracy in the
United States, with the presidency as a transitional
institution that would eventually lead to monarchy.
Similar accusations were voiced when members of
the society became involved in settling the Ohio
territory (and the subsequent founding of the settlement Cincinnati); critics saw this as the genesis of
a new nation ruled by the society.
On the whole, the accusations against the Cincinnati were largely unfounded. During the tempestuous 1780s, radical members might well have wished
for a monarchy, possibly with Washington as king, to
impose political order. However, the society never
pursued any such policies, especially as Washington
himself was adamantly opposed to anything that
might threaten civilian, republican government.
While most Cincinnati strongly supported the new
Constitution, there were also members among AntiFederalist leaders, most notably governor George
Clinton of New York. Similarly, during the first party
system, most Cincinnati tended toward the Federalists, but there were also many among the Jeffersonian Republicans. If the society furnished the largest
part of the new national army’s officer corps, this was
only to be expected and had little political effect.
Even when Congress debated the fate of commutation certificates in 1790, the society did not make a
strong lobbying effort on behalf of its members.

Spotlight

Consequently, the accusations against the society
largely faded away at the beginning of the nineteenth century, even though by that time most state
societies had reverted to the formerly controversial
succession by heredity. The Society of the Cincinnati nearly faded during the first half of the nineteenth century, but experienced a revival after 1854
and exists to the present. The conspiracy theory can
still be encountered, but usually as a bit of conspiracy trivia rather than a full-fledged theory.
Markus Hünemörder
See also: Anti-Federalists; Constitution, U.S.;
Newburgh Conspiracy; Shays’ Rebellion.
References
Main, Jackson Turner. 1961. The Anti-Federalists:
Critics of the Constitution, 1781–88. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press.
Myers, Minor. 1983. Liberty without Anarchy: A
History of the Society of the Cincinnati.
Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.

Spotlight
Originally known as the National Spotlight, for much
of its existence the Spotlight was the most important
conspiracist publication in the United States. Established by Willis Carto, whose involvement in the U.S
Right goes back to the mid-1950s, the paper was
launched in 1975 and appeared for just over a quarter of a century. Its contents ranged widely but a
number of themes were particularly evident. One
was an indictment of the banking system, in which
the creation of the Federal Reserve immediately
before World War I was seen as the work of America’s enemies, while one of its more unusual concerns
focused on what might be termed “fringe” or alternative medicine. A cure for cancer, it declared, had
been discovered but this breakthrough was being
suppressed by the Rockefeller family. Amidst the different conspiracies that the paper sought to expose,
the most important involved the activities of a series
of international organizations. In late 1994, for
instance, it published a supplement that suggested
the United States was about to be occupied by troops
under United Nations control. Other subjects of the
paper’s attentions included the activities of the Trilat-

eral Commission and its particular bête noire, the
Bilderberg Group.
None of these concerns was unique to the Spotlight, but by the beginning of the 1980s the paper
had achieved a circulation of some 300,000. In the
1990s, however, this had fallen to some 90,000, a
decline that was particularly connected with its
denunciation of the Reagan government as a tool of
the Trilateral Commission. If its base among conservatives was substantially lost during the Reagan
years, it found support instead among the Patriot
movement, and in the 1990s was a key publicist for
the militias. This did not preclude an involvement
in electoral politics, and while during the 1990s it
supported the Populist Party (whose 1988 presidential candidate was the former Ku Klux Klan
leader David Duke), it subsequently supported the
presidential candidacies, first for the Republican
Party, then the Reform Party, of the “America First”
conservative, Pat Buchanan.
While conspiracy theory is often seen as inherently antisemitic, Patriots vary greatly as to how they
explain the plot against the United States. One of
the secrets of the Spotlight’s success was not only
the diversity of its conspiratorial interests but also its
downplaying of the overt racism of some other farright publications. But the paper’s claim that Israeli
intelligence had been involved in the assassination
of John F. Kennedy was only one indication of the
underlying basis of its arguments. This was even
more evident in Carto’s creation in the late 1970s of
the Institute for Historical Review, an organization
that rapidly became the central force in Holocaust
revisionism. It was singularly appropriate, then, that
the paper’s support for Holocaust denial should lead
to its demise. In 1993, disputes over the whereabouts of a bequest led to a breach between Carto
and key members of the staff of the Institute for
Historical Review, and the ultimate result of the
legal actions that followed was the closing down of
the Spotlight in the summer of 2001. A successor
publication, American Free Press, quickly emerged.
Martin Durham
See also: Bilderbergers; Holocaust, Denial of;
Liberty Lobby; Trilateral Commission.

669

Stamp Act

References
Berlet, Chip, and Matthew N. Lyons. 2000. RightWing Populism in America. New York: Guilford
Press.
Diamond, Sara. 1995. Roads to Dominion. RightWing Movements and Political Power in the
United States. New York: Guilford Press.
Durham, Martin. 2000. The Christian Right, the Far
Right and the Boundaries of Conservatism.
Manchester, England: Manchester University
Press.
Mulloy, D. J., ed. 1999. Homegrown
Revolutionaries: An American Militia Reader.
Norwich, England: Arthur Miller Centre for
American Studies/UEA Press.
National Spotlight, 24 October 1975; 5 January
1976.
Spotlight, 15 March 1999.
Websites
American Free Press: http://amfreepress.net.
Spotlight: http://www.spotlight.org/Newsbure . . . /
Liberty_Lobby/liberty_lobby.html.

Stamp Act
The Stamp Act was a tax on a variety of print material, legal documents, dice, and playing cards
intended to raise an estimated £60,000 to pay the
costs of housing British troops stationed in North
America to provide for colonial defense. George
Grenville, First Lord of the Treasury and Chancellor of the Exchequer under King George III from
1763 until 1765, called for its enactment as part of
a larger plan for more effectively managing Great
Britain’s North American territories. Grenville
announced his intention to levy a stamp tax on the
American colonies in March 1764 and indicated
that they had one year to post their objections.
Although some opposed the measure, Grenville did
not expect any sort of widespread opposition to the
tax. Consequently, Parliament passed the measure
with little debate or opposition on 22 March 1765,
but the measure did not go into effect until 1
November 1765. Yet, from this innocuous beginning, the American colonists quickly interpreted
Grenville’s call for a stamp tax as part of a vast conspiracy to deny the colonists their basic rights as
Englishmen and to economically enslave them.
670

Two events led to the passage of the Stamp Act:
the debt crisis caused by the Seven Years’ War and a
Native American uprising in the Great Lakes region
and Ohio River Valley led by an Ottawa chieftain
named Pontiac. The Seven Years’ War (1756–1763)
was fought between Great Britain and France for
control of North America; this war led to British
domination in North America with the exception of
New Spain—the territory west of the Mississippi
River. The war left Britain with a large debt and a
new North American empire to manage—both of
which required additional revenues. After waging a
long war against the French for control of the Ohio
and Mississippi River valleys, Britain had to face
another crisis. Chief Pontiac and his followers
launched a series of strikes that led to the loss of
almost every fort west of Niagara within a few weeks.
The systematic Native American effort targeting
British forts began tapering off in 1764, and hostilities formally ceased when Pontiac surrendered to
the British in July 1766. Pontiac’s rebellion highlighted the need for more effective management of
the colonial settlements in America as well as the
need to bolster colonial defense; the uprising also
gave an added sense of urgency to Parliament’s need
to secure additional revenue through the Stamp Act.
Grenville started to implement a comprehensive
plan to address the emerging imperial crisis developing in America. To prevent future Native American
uprisings, Grenville sought to adjust colonial boundaries in North America, which basically meant to separate the English colonists from Native American
tribal lands. In pursuit of this goal, the Grenville ministry implemented the Proclamation of 1763 and set
the Appalachian Mountains as the western border of
American settlement; the proclamation reserved the
bulk of the Ohio and Mississippi River valleys as
tribal lands for the Native Americans who inhabited
the region. Once the new borders were set, they
would be enforced by the construction of a string of
frontier forts that would house British troops, should
there be another Indian uprising. The implementation of the Proclamation of 1763 necessitated the collection of additional revenues to pay for colonial
defense. In the quest of such revenue, Grenville
secured passage of the Sugar Act and the Stamp Act.

Stamp Act

Many American colonists, however, did not
regard Grenville’s agenda as an attempt to manage
more effectively Britain’s new transatlantic empire;
they viewed his efforts as part of a vast conspiracy to
redefine the relationship between crown and
colony to their disadvantage, by stripping away their
basic rights as Englishmen. The logic behind this
fear of conspiracy stemmed from the simple reality
that the taxes would have to be paid in specie (i.e.,
gold and silver coin). The problem for the colonists
who had to pay the taxes related to the absence of
specie in America—they did not have the means to
pay the tax. Yet, if they did not pay, they would be
in violation of the law. Grenville made it clear he
intended to enforce these measures and that all
infractions would be tried in the vice-admiralty
courts—a move that effectively denied those who
violated the law a jury trial. The simultaneous passage of a fourth measure, the Currency Act of 1764,
fanned American fears of conspiracy because it
mandated that private debts could no longer be
paid with paper currency; such debts would also
have to be paid in specie. The American colonists
did not have enough coin to pay their taxes, let
alone their private debts as well.
The combined effects of the Proclamation of
1763, the Sugar Act, the Currency Act, and the
Stamp Act led many prominent American colonists
to the conclusion that Grenville’s ministry sought to
enslave them economically. Grenville’s reliance on
the vice-admiralty courts to prosecute violators convinced many Americans that they did not have any
legal recourse to combat these measures; consequently, those who were adamantly opposed to
Grenville’s agenda took extralegal (or illegal) action.
In many respects, the Stamp Act represented the
final straw, and widespread protests against the
Stamp Act ensued. In cities throughout the colonies,
radical groups, led by men such as Samuel Adams of
Massachusetts and Richard Henry Lee of Virginia,
organized mob activity that, through violence and
intimidation, forced the appointed stamp distributors to resign before the 1 November 1765 enactment date. More moderate groups in America
voiced their opposition in a more staid manner. In
October 1765, a group of colonists convened the

Burning of the Stamp Act, August 1764. (Library of
Congress)

Stamp Act Congress, which met in New York. Those
who attended the congress sought to achieve the
same goals as Adams and Lee, but without the
threat of violence. The congress lasted just over two
weeks and presented a list of fourteen grievances
justifying the repeal of the Stamp Act. The ninth
grievance summed up the sentiments shared by
both radicals and moderates: “That the Duties
imposed by several late Acts of Parliament, from the
peculiar Circumstances of these Colonies, will be
extremely Burthensome and Grievous; and from the
scarcity of Specie, the Payment of them absolutely
impracticable.” The widespread colonial protests
against the Stamp Act that forced the stamp distributors to resign nullified the measure before it actually went into effect. On 18 March 1766, Parliament
repealed the Stamp Act, essentially acknowledging
671

Steamshovel Press

the state of affairs in America. The damage, however, was already done: the Stamp Act protests set
the tone for the relationship between crown and
colony until the beginning of the War for American
Independence, as radical groups intensified their
opposition toward Parliament and moderates sought
to heal the widening rift.
J. Kent McGaughy
See also: Pontiac, Chief; Quebec Act.
References
Anderson, Fred. 2000. Crucible of War: The Seven
Years’ War and the Fate of Empire in British
North America, 1754–1766. New York: Alfred A.
Knopf.
“Declarations of the Stamp Act Congress.” [1765]
1959. In Prologue to Revolution: Sources and
Documents on the Stamp Act Crisis, 1764–1766,
ed. Edmund S. Morgan. Chapel Hill: University
of North Carolina Press.
Jensen, Merrill. 1968. The Founding of a Nation: A
History of the American Revolution, 1763–1776.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Martin, James Kirby. 1979. In the Course of Human
Events: An Interpretive Exploration of the
American Revolution. Arlington Heights, IL:
AHM.
Morgan, Edmund S., and Helen M. Morgan. 1995.
The Stamp Act Crisis: Prologue to Revolution,
with a New Preface by Edmund S. Morgan.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press.

Steamshovel Press
Steamshovel Press is a zine with accompanying web
page that is published in St. Louis, Missouri. Originally the Press was entirely the work of Kenn
Thomas, an archivist at the University of Missouri–
St. Louis. Steamshovel Press focuses primarily on
politically based conspiracy theories, particularly
those dealing with assassinations. The zine is not
strictly a political one, however; UFO cover-ups are
frequently examined. Thomas refers to himself as a
“parapoliticalist,” suggesting one who works on the
fringes of the normal realm of politcs. Steamshovel
Press also regularly discusses beat literature, which
Thomas sees as having ties to conspiracy studies. The
672

magazine is not hesitant to endorse even the most
outlandish conspiracy notions; its motto is “All conspiracy. No theory.” Still, the zine is highly regarded
within the conspiracy community; Immerse magazine calls it “the Bible of conspiracy theory” and disinformation.com says it features “cutting-edge conspiriology research at its finest.”
Thomas traces his interest in conspiracy theory
back to John F. Kennedy’s assassination, which
occurred when Thomas was five years old; the
Kennedy assassination continues to inspire articles in
Steamshovel Press and in 1997 Thomas coauthored
the book Mind Control, Oswald and JFK: Were We
Controlled? Paul Krassner’s radical magazine of the
1960s, the Realist, was also an influence on
Steamshovel Press and Thomas’s writing in general.
Thomas was working as a rock music critic and freelance journalist when he founded Steamshovel Press
in the late 1980s. The publication began as a newsletter and did not adopt the magazine format until its
fourth issue. Like many zine editors, Thomas admits
to starting a zine simply in order to receive free product to review; book reviews remain an important feature. Steamshovel Press was also born out of
Thomas’s inability to find a market for some of his
freelance work, particularly an interview with Ram
Dass, a spiritual leader and contemporary of Timothy
Leary. Thomas also felt there was a void in conspiracy publications; Mae Brussell had recently died and
the conspiracy zine Critique had ceased publication.
When Steamshovel Press made the transition from
newsletter to zine in 1992, other writers began contributing. Since then the Press has run articles by
such well-known conspiracy journalists as Jim Keith,
Jonathan Vankin, Jim Martin, and Robert Anson Wilson. Keith and Thomas also collaborated on the
influential The Octopus: Secret Government and the
Death of Danny Casolaro. Since 1993 Steamshovel
Press has published one or two issues a year; the issue
bearing the unlucky number thirteen was never published and is referred to as the “phantom” issue. A
web page was established in 1996; much of the material on the page, including a regular column titled
“The Latest Word,” does not appear in the zine.
In addition to the zine and web page, three collections of writings from Steamshovel Press have

Stock Market Crash of 1929

been published. Popular Alienation: A Steamshovel
Press Reader was brought out by IllumiNet Press in
1995; it consists of issues four through eleven of the
zine along with material from the phantom issue.
Cyberculture Conspiracy: Volume One (1999) and
Volume Two (2000) were published by Book Tree;
each contains writings from the web page.
Randall Clark
See also: Mae Brussel.
Reference
Steamshovel Press: http://www.steamshovelpress.
com.

Stock Market Crash of 1929
One of the most surprising aspects of the “Great
Crash,” as the stock market crash of October 1929 is
called, is that there are not more conspiracy theories
concerning its origins and results. However, there
are plenty to keep any researcher busy. Among the
most prominent:
• Webster Tarpley, in his Against Oligarcy,
claims that the crash was the result of “economic warfare” by Great Britain and the
Bank of England against “the rest of the
world.” A similar view appeared in The Greatest Story Never Told: Winston Churchill and
the Crash of 1929, which has the British
prime minister somehow causing the
crash . . . even though Churchill did not
become prime minister for another decade!
• Pundits of the day, supported by the United
States Congress, investigated charges that the
crash was perpetrated by the “banksters,”
such as Charles Mitchell, of National City
Bank, for personal gain.
• It was a “secret commitment” to the gold
standard (and indirectly, the Bank of
England) made by the “House of Morgan”
that caused the crash.
• The Federal Reserve perpetrated the crash,
mistakenly trying to keep bank profits up. A
related conspiracy theory views the Fed as
rapidly inflating the money supply in the

1920s in order to pump up the profits of men
such as Rockefeller and Morgan.
• Some Christian extremists, seeking to demonize Franklin D. Roosevelt, portray the Great
Crash as the result of a bank conspiracy to
plunge the nation into chaos so that Roosevelt
could take over as a dictator, end all private
ownership of gold, and centralize government
further.
• A less conspiratorial-sounding, but equally
removed-from-reality viewpoint was
expressed in the famous tirade by John Kenneth Galbraith, The Great Crash, 1929 (1955)
in which he blamed “inequities in wealth”—a
conspiracy of the rich against the poor—for
the crash.
Seventy-three years after the Great Crash, scholars
still have not reached a consensus on the causes of
the stock market plunge, but have tested some of the
conspiracy theories well enough to have ruled them
out. It is useful to begin in the boom of the 1920s, and
the notion that the boom embodied wild speculation.
Not so, say a battery of studies. White (1990), Santoni
and Dwyer (1990), and White and Rappoport (1994)
all debate the size of the “bubble” or the speculation,
but all agree also that whatever level of speculation
can be proven remains insufficient to explain the
crash. Santoni and White especially contend that
securities records show that investors were generally
well informed, that the securities matched up well
with their earnings projections, and that bond ratings
had up to that point tended to correspond accurately
to securities prices. In short, most academics today—
aside from the Keynesian Left and the radical Christian Right—discount or completely reject the “great
bull market” theory as an explanation for the bust.
What about the view that the Federal Reserve
pumped up the money supply—by more than 100
percent in the 1920s as one source claimed? Money
supply expansion must be measured against growth
in the aggregate economy, as money is only a symbol
of wealth created. The fact is that the U.S. economy
in the 1920s was growing faster than, possibly, any
economy at any time in the history of the world.
There were entirely new products available for the
673

Stock Market Crash of 1929

first time to middle-class consumers: radios, automobiles, electrical appliances, and securities themselves. Charles Merrill, of Merrill Lynch, pioneered
securities sales to the middle class during this time.
Manufacturing according to most indices nearly
doubled from 1920 to 1929; price indices reveal virtually no increase in prices for goods or services;
unemployment dropped to the unheard-of levels of
under 2 percent in 1926, and remained under 4 percent for most of the decade; and work hours fell. By
the end of the decade, the United States held more
than one-third of world production. At essentially
full employment and robust production, the Fed
would have had to crank out money at far higher
rates just to stay even with the booming economy.
This has produced another set of scholarly studies, which, though hardly conspiratorial, do not
paint a flattering picture of government’s ability to
deal with financial matters. In 1963, economists
Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz published
their seminal work, A Monetary History of the
United States, in which they demonstrated that in
fact the Federal Reserve barely kept up in the
1920s, then failed miserably to supply liquidity after
the crash started and banks started failing. Normally, Friedman’s book would have been hailed by
conspiracy theorists, in that it portrayed the government (via the Fed) as incompetent. But Friedman
maintained that it was not the Fed itself that failed,
but only short-sighted officials. Had New York Federal Reserve President Benjamin Strong lived past
1928, Friedman hypothesized, the Great Depression never would have happened.
To have Friedman give conspiracy theorists a great
victory with one hand and take it away with the other
took his works off their “must read” lists. Indeed,
Friedman remained an oddity: he favored near-total
market freedom in every economic activity except
banking, where he rejected the notion that competitive money could provide an answer to financial
uncertainties. Nevertheless, his work effectively
demolished the Keynes/Galbraith view of “underconsumption” and “over-saving,” and took the blame
nearly completely off business and put it on the
shoulders of government.

674

The gold standard, a central theme in conspiracy
theorists’ arguments about the Great Crash and
Great Depression, next came under a withering fire
from other academics, such as Barry Eichengreen
(Golden Fetters), who showed that far from international cooperation to maintain the gold standard at
the “expense” of the “common man,” each national
bank was engaged in cutthroat competition to sustain
its own position relative to that of other national
banks. In other words, the Bank of France, rather
than secretly working with the Bank of England and
the Federal Reserve to conduct monetary policy conducive to the interests of the Rothschilds and the
Morgans, in fact undercut the Bank of England and
the Federal Reserve to gain market advantages. Ultimately, each nation in the world left the gold standard except the United States, which, Eichengreen
contends, resulted in a massive gold drain from U.S.
vaults. Put another way, foreign speculators could get
U.S. gold for French, German, or British paper.
Thus, ironically, the gold standard was responsible
for the Depression, although Eichengreen does not
tie the gold standard as clearly to the Great Crash.
Still, it is the ultimate irony that if Eichengreen is
correct, it was Franklin D. Roosevelt’s act of taking
the United States off the gold standard that saved the
banking system in 1933! Once again, though, in
Eichengreen’s system, the gold standard could only
work in the best of all worlds, where politicians did
not follow national interest, but rather sought the
welfare of the international community through the
gold standard first.
If notions about the Federal Reserve “causing”
the Great Crash have been fairly well disproved,
and if the gold standard has been demonstrated to
have at best played a harmful role in accelerating
the economic decline, and if “disparities in wealth”
do not explain the Crash, then what does? The
answer is that economists still don’t know. They can
show, as Eugene White does, that the involvement
of banks in securities operations did not weaken the
banks, but in fact strengthened them. They can
show, as several scholars have, that it was the middle class purchasing stocks and bonds, not “the
rich.” Is there a “smoking gun,” though?

Stone, Oliver

In 1978, economist (though not an academic) Jude
Wanniski published The Way the World Works, in
which he tied fluctuations in the stock market to the
progress through Congress of the Smoot-Hawley
Tariff. This tariff bill would have increased duties
across the board, but would have hit particularly hard
raw materials needed in manufacturing, thus ensuring that prices on finished goods would have to rise,
and that sales would fall. Likewise, most analysts
expected that if the bill passed, foreign countries
would immediately respond with their own tariffs on
U.S. goods, causing U.S. sales overseas to fall. Foreseeing this impact, businesses braced themselves by
selling off their own securities in anticipation of the
need to “get liquid.” The business sell-off, in turn,
triggered a market-wide panic. Without the tools of
econometricians, Wanniski was left to “qualitative”
evidence—links between critical points in the bill’s
passage and downturns in the market. He points to
the key meeting of a congressional committee on 28
October that guaranteed the bill’s final passage (the
floor vote was assured if Smoot-Hawley got out of
committee), claiming this sparked the sell-off.
Until recently, Wanniski’s lack of academic credentials allowed some scholars to ignore him. But
several new studies, by Doug Irwin and Mario
Crucini, have thrown new fuel on the SmootHawley fire: they have not only applied modern
econometric tools, but have found that Wanniski
actually substantially understated the expected
harm of Smoot-Hawley due to the fact that he had
not accounted for the Federal Reserve’s deflation
(see Friedman, above). When the impact of dollar
deflation was combined with the tariff bill, it had
the potential, by itself, with no other “New Deal”
or Federal Reserve policy, to reduce U.S. gross
national product by 5 percent.
Wanniski, Irwin, and Crucini, along with Eichengreen, have thus turned the conspiracy theorists’
world upside down: protective tariffs, as advocated
by politicians such as Pat Buchanan and “New
World Order” theorists, may have caused the Great
Crash, and the gold standard likely made it worse.
Of course, most conspiracy theorists can rejoice
that virtually all scholars pretty much agree that the

Federal Reserve bungled badly in the 1920s,
although exactly how the Fed failed remains a matter of heated debate.
Larry Schweikart
See also: Gold Standard; Federal Reserve System.
References
Crucini, Mario J. and James Kahn. 1996. “Tariffs
and Aggregate Economic Activity: Lessons from
the Great Depression.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 38: 427–467.
Eichengreen, Barry. 1989. “The Political Economy
of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff.” In Research in
Economic History, ed. Roger L. Ransome. Vol.
12. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
———. 1992. Golden Fetters. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Irwin, Doug. 1998. “The Smoot-Hawley Tariff: A
Quantitative Assessment.” Review of Economics
and Statistics 80: 326–334.
Rothbard, Murray. 1963. America’s Great
Depression. Princeton, NJ: D. Van Nostrand.
Santoni, Gary, and Gerald Dwyer. 1990. “Bubbles
vs. Fundamentals: New Evidence from the Great
Bull Markets.” Pp. 188–210 in Crises and Panics:
The Lessons of History, ed Eugene White.
Homewood, IL: Dow Jones/Irwin.
Wanniski, Jude. 1978. The Way the World Works:
How Economies Fail—and Succeed. New York:
BasicBooks.
White, Eugene. 1990. “The Stock Market Boom and
Crash of 1929 Revisited.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 4: 67–83.
White, Eugene, and Peter Rappoport. 1994. “Was
the Crash of 1929 Expected?” American
Economic Review 84: 271–281.

Stone, Oliver
Oliver Stone is a filmmaker whose politically charged
films have often provoked controversy. However,
Stone’s 1991 film JFK, a docudrama centered upon
New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison’s investigation during 1967–1969 into the assassination of
President John F. Kennedy, is undoubtedly the most
controversial of Stone’s works. In fact, no other film
in U.S. cinema history has attracted quite the same
level of critical outrage and scrutiny as JFK did
before, during, and after its theatrical run. Given the

675

Stone, Oliver

negative media coverage of Garrison’s failed attempt
during the late 1960s to convict New Orleans businessman Clay Shaw of conspiracy in the murder of
President Kennedy, it is not surprising that a film that
recasts that same event in a manner much more
favorable to Garrison, and further accuses most of
the governmental apparatus of the United States of
murdering its own president, would create yet
another media tumult.
Stone’s early life in many ways had prepared him
for such public combat. He was born on 15 September 1946 in New York City to a Jewish stockbroker
father and a French Catholic mother whose marriage ended in divorce. Stone entered Yale in 1965
but dropped out after one year and moved to Vietnam and then Mexico. In 1967, Stone joined the
army and returned to Vietnam as a solider. He
served fifteen months in the 25th Infantry Division,
where he was wounded twice. Upon his return to
the United States in 1968, he entered New York
University Film School. His subsequent film career
included screen-writing credit for Midnight Express
(1978) and Scarface (1983) and directorial credit for
The Hand (1981), Salvador (1985), Platoon (1986),
Wall Street (1987), Talk Radio (1988), Born on the
Fourth of July (1989), and The Doors (1991). During this productive period, Stone read Jim Garrison’s
1988 book, entitled On the Trail of the Assassins,
about the investigation and trial of Clay Shaw. Stone
believed that Garrison’s narrative could form the
basis of a powerful film.
Inspired by the book, Stone began his own investigation into the intellectual netherworld of JFK conspiracy theories to augment Garrison’s story. Stone
purchased the rights to Jim Marr’s book Crossfire:
The Plot that Killed Kennedy (1991) and hired a Yale
graduate named Jane Rusconi to assemble a team of
researchers and interviewers. Stone and his team
thus joined the ranks of those who had long sought
to establish the existence of a conspiracy to murder
the thirty-fifth president. Almost since the moment
the president was killed in Dallas, conflicting eyewitness accounts suggested that shots were directed at
the presidential motorcade from more than one
direction (most infamously, from the grassy knoll in
front of the president’s limousine). The 1964 Warren
676

Commission, formed to investigate the truth behind
the shooting, produced a twenty-six-volume report
that named Lee Harvey Oswald as the sole assassin
of the president but instantly generated intense criticism of its conclusions from early assassination
researchers such as Mark Lane, Josiah Thompson,
Sylvia Meager, and Harold Weisberg. The untimely
deaths of many participants or witnesses to the
events fostered a climate of mystery and paranoia
that only aggravated researchers’ feeling that something sinister was afoot. In the years following the
assassination, the public followed the early skeptics’
lead and a majority increasingly came to believe that
a conspiracy, not just a lone gunman, had killed President Kennedy. Even the United States House of
Representatives Select Committee on Assassinations
in 1979 concluded that Kennedy “was probably
assassinated as the result of a conspiracy.” Stone and
co-writer Zachary Sklar then began incorporating all
of these disparate elements into a lengthy screenplay
(first draft of 190 pages), which in its final form is a
distillation of most of the varied conspiracy theories
advocated by assassination researchers over the
years. Beginning in 1990, Stone also met with a former colonel and Pentagon chief of special operations
named Fletcher Prouty, whose career and theories
about the motives behind the assassination provided
the inspiration for one of the film’s most important
informants. Securing studio backing from Warner
Brothers in 1989, Stone proceeded to active production, filming, and post-production during 1990 and
1991.
JFK in its final form is primarily a murder mystery
based in part on Garrison’s memoirs of the investigation and trial of Clay Shaw and further incorporating
various aspects of Stone’s own research into the presidential assassination. As the cinematic narrative
unfolds, authentic footage is frequently and rapidly
intercut into the film’s re-creation of historical events
to give the movie its startling verisimilitude. As Chris
Salewicz observes, the film also interweaves at least
four separate storylines in an impressionistic, almost
stream-of-consciousness manner, influenced heavily
by the multiple perspectives in Akira Kurosawa’s
famous 1950 film Rashomon and the 1969 Constantin Costa-Gavras political film Z (Salewicz, 81). JFK

Stone, Oliver

begins with a prologue depicting the election, presidency, and assassination of President Kennedy. Then
the film shifts to Garrison’s investigation of a New
Orleans connection to supposed assassin Lee Harvey
Oswald—a connection that ultimately implicates private detective and ex-FBI agent Guy Banister,
homosexual former Eastern Airlines pilot David
Ferrie, and Clay Shaw. Garrison gradually becomes
convinced that these men are part of a larger, rightwing conspiracy directed against President Kennedy
and comprising a devil’s brew of anti-Castro exiles,
Mafia gangsters, the CIA, military intelligence, and
even the Lyndon B. Johnson White House. Garrison
concludes that Oswald, slain in Dallas in 1963 by
gangster Jack Ruby, was a patsy, set up to look guilty
by the larger forces behind the president’s shooting.
As Garrison retraces the Warren Commission investigation and tries to build a case against David Ferrie and Clay Shaw, Garrison is continually stymied by
staff defections, governmental interference, media
scorn, and even the mysterious deaths of key figures
such as David Ferrie. Only Clay Shaw survives to be
arrested and tried for the murder of the president.
However, given the insurmountable obstacles
arrayed against Garrison, the trial’s outcome is a
foregone conclusion. Shaw is acquitted, but Garrison
vows to continue the crusade to bring Kennedy’s
killers to justice.
Garrison, portrayed by Kevin Costner as a relatively uncomplicated seeker after the truth, obviously
believes in the merits of his case, even if few others
do. Since the film is portrayed from Garrison’s point
of view and those of the people he interviews, his
conclusions may appear to be presented as absolute
fact to the undiscriminating viewer. But the film is
ultimately more complex than it seems, as Susan
Mackey-Kallis observes, because it searches “for the
‘truth’ with the realization that there is no single,
ultimately knowable truth about the Kennedy assassination” (Mackey-Kallis, 38). Indeed, JFK raises
more questions than it solves. The film considers several possible conspiracies in the assassination but
finally suggests that President Kennedy was killed in
a coup d’état organized by a shadowy U.S. cabal of
governmental and industrial concerns. In a covert
meeting in Washington, D.C., a government inform-

ant based on Fletcher Prouty (“Colonel X”) tells Garrison that this cabal’s primary agenda was to profit
from an escalation of war in Vietnam. Through X, the
film postulates that Kennedy’s refusal to support the
ill-fated Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in 1963, and his
intention to abolish the Central Intelligence Agency
and diminish the power of the military-industrial
complex by withdrawing advisors and troops from
Vietnam during a second term of office, resulted in
his murder by those committed to wartime militarism. Yet careful attention to the film reveals that
no matter how persuasively argued or visualized, the
theories proposed by X or even Garrison remain conjecture, not absolute fact. Stone himself claims that
JFK is deliberately designed as a “counter-myth” to
provoke scrutiny of the official “myth” of the Warren
Commission’s conclusion that Lee Harvey Oswald
acted alone in shooting President Kennedy from the
sixth floor of the Texas Schoolbook Depository. In
this goal of reopening a national dialogue about a
possible conspiracy behind the Kennedy assassination, Stone succeeded beyond all expectations. His
success also placed him at the center of a media and
political firestorm.
Stone was denounced and vilified by numerous
high-profile media and governmental critics even
before JFK’s public premiere. After an early draft of
the screenplay was leaked, Washington Post writer
George Lardner, Jr., and Chicago Tribune writer Jon
Margolis began attacking JFK in May 1991, before
the film’s winter release. Other negative articles
appeared during the film’s post-production phase. As
the film opened, the New York Times, the Washington Post, the San Francisco Weekly, the Chicago Sun
Times, the Dallas Morning News, the Wall Street
Journal, the L.A. Times, and Time and Newsweek
magazines all weighed in repeatedly with decidedly
negative appraisals of Stone’s film, in essence labeling
it demagoguery. For example, Newsweek ran a cover
story headlined, “Why Oliver Stone’s New Movie
Can’t Be Trusted.” The New York Times in particular
devoted much column and editorial space to the
assault on the movie. Noted journalists, commentators, media figures, and politicians joined forces to
savage not only the film’s conspiracy theories but
seemingly the director himself. Writers Alexander
677

Stone, Oliver

Cockburn, Tom Wicker, and George Will; film critic
Leonard Maltin; director Nora Ephron; president of
the Motion Picture Association of America Jack
Valenti; former U.S. President and Warren Commission member Gerald Ford—all went on the record as
strongly, almost viscerally, opposed to Stone and his
project.
These and other critics insisted that Stone heavyhandedly distorted history, invented characters that
never existed and slandered others that did, mixed
speculation and fact to an irresponsible degree, and
unfairly influenced younger audience members
whose exposure to history presumably came only
from the simplistic exaggerations of television and
film. Some critics insisted that the film was homophobic in its depiction of David Ferrie and Clay
Shaw as homosexual. Also troubling to many critics
was the film’s flattening of the complex, tarnished
character of the real-life Jim Garrison. Frank Beaver
calls the cinematic Garrison a “representational icon
rather than a human being—in the end, a symbolic
teacher lecturing a class” (Beaver, 172). Most journalists reporting on the real trial of Clay Shaw
regarded the prosecution as a ludicrous farce perpetrated by a grandstanding, publicity-seeking, and
quite possibly corrupt district attorney. Allegations
of underworld connections, illegal gambling, and
witness tampering and bribery persistently dogged
Garrison’s career as district attorney and, later,
elected judge. Even many conspiracy theorists
believed that Garrison’s true agenda in the trial of
Clay Shaw had been to divert attention away from a
Mafia connection to the assassination. Stone was not
unaware of the negative sentiment about Garrison
(in fact had even confronted Garrison about these
charges early in the process of researching JFK) but
chose to disregard them, as he was making a film
about the conspiracy to kill Kennedy, not a biography of Jim Garrison. But to see Garrison practically
sainted by Stone’s version of events and played as a
straight arrow by Kevin Costner in the best Jimmy
Stewart/Frank Capra tradition was likely more than
some critics could bear.
Stone did have his share of media supporters,
such as Garry Trudeau, Garry Wills, Norman Mailer,
David Denby, and David Ansen, but at first the neg678

ative press far outweighed the positive. Stone
defended himself in various public and media
forums, and eventually his lonely campaign began to
pay off. Even as the editorial elite pounded him,
public sentiment shifted toward Stone. He began
meeting with congressmen to advocate the release
of sealed assassination files. Also, in response to the
widespread charge that Stone had distorted or fabricated fact for the movie, Stone and Zachary Sklar
published JFK—The Book of the Film, in 1992. The
book contained the annotated screenplay, extensive
sources and references, and pro and con commentaries by the film’s supporters and critics.
The film itself, after an initially slow box-office
start, became a commercial success. It was nominated for eight Academy Awards, including best picture and best adapted screenplay, and won two in
the categories of film editing and cinematography.
JFK personally garnered Stone a Golden Globe
Award for best director, and Director’s Guild of
America and Academy Award nominations for best
director, as well as political and civic recognition
such as the Torch of Liberty Award from the Civil
Liberties Union of Southern California. Eventually,
the film’s publicity resulted in the token release of a
few formerly secret files and culminated in the congressional Assassination Records Collection Act of
1992, which released many of the previously classified government documents related to the assassination. Although the released records provided no
conclusive evidence of an assassination conspiracy,
enough tantalizing clues emerged to provide conspiracy researchers with more fodder for their particular theories. JFK thus joins the relatively rare
ranks of films that have inspired direct political
action.
The film’s notoriety also revitalized the political
conspiracy thriller genre. Throughout its history,
U.S. cinema had often trafficked in conspiratorial or
even paranoid topics, often by depicting dastardly
external enemies such as Communists or even inhuman ones such as body-snatching space aliens. However, in the political conspiracy genre entries of
which JFK is the apotheosis, the fascistic threat is
even more insidious, as it originates from within the
very social institutions charged with protecting

Stono Rebellion

democracy and the American people. Even the
president of the United States, JFK tells the audience, is a helpless (and disposable) pawn of such
forces. This view displaces the individual and assigns
power to a decentralized, self-contained system
lethal to the kind of humanistic values touted by
Kennedy in his university address during the film’s
prologue. Stone’s sweeping indictment of what his
cinematic alter ego Garrison calls “the ascendancy of
invisible government” went much further than any
previous film had done. The public acceptance of
JFK’s grim message illustrates dramatically just how
entrenched the mistrust of governmental institutions had become since the great disillusionments of
the 1960s and 1970s.
Nevertheless, in the decade since JFK’s release,
much of the assassination controversy has subsided.
(In the wake of the September 11 terrorist attack
upon the United States, the film’s antimilitarism
message may even seem momentarily out of favor.)
Norman Mailer’s fictional biography, Oswald (1995),
faded quickly from sight, and Gerald Posner’s book
Case Closed (1993) seemed to satisfy most media
observers, if not the public, that Oswald was indeed
the lone assassin. Meanwhile, Stone has weathered
other controversies over his films Natural Born
Killers (1994) and Nixon (1995). Both films ventured
into some of the same thematic and stylistic territory
as JFK. Nixon created a minor flare-up among many
of the same political and editorial elite who had been
outraged by JFK. Stone’s second presidential film
portrays Richard M. Nixon as a hapless figure caught
up in tangential involvement with the Bay of Pigs
invasion of Cuba, assassination attempts against Castro, and escalation of the Vietnam War, all of which
are central to JFK and ultimately conspire, in Stone’s
rendition of history, to topple the Nixon regime in
the Watergate scandal. But mostly because of JFK,
Oliver Stone’s name has become synonymous with
“conspiracy theory.”
Philip L. Simpson
See also: Film and Conspiracy Theory; Kennedy,
John F., Assassination of.
References
Beaver, Frank. 1994. Oliver Stone: Wakeup Cinema.
New York: Twayne Publishers.

Mackey-Kallis, Susan. 1996. Oliver Stone’s America:
“Dreaming the Myth Outward.” Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Riordan, James. 1995. Stone: The Controversies,
Excesses, and Exploits of a Radical Filmmaker.
New York: Hyperion.
Salewicz, Chris. 1997. Oliver Stone. New York:
Thunder’s Mouth Press.

Stono Rebellion
The Stono Rebellion of 1793 was the largest uprising of African slaves on the mainland of North
America during the colonial period. It began when
about twenty slaves, likely first-generation Africans,
attacked a local shop about fifteen miles southwest
of Charles Town, South Carolina, and secured guns,
powder, and other weapons. Throughout the encounter, the slaves demonstrated a familiarity with
military tactics, learned from military training in
Africa. After all of the slaves had been killed or captured by the militia, South Carolina authorities instituted draconian measures in an effort to control the
black majority in the colony. Despite the apparent
success in suppressing the rebellion, a grave and
often unwarranted fear of slaves conspiring to kill
their masters and escape from bondage would persist among white South Carolinians throughout the
colonial and antebellum periods.
The uprising began early on Sunday morning, 9
September 1739. The slaves surprised and killed
local storekeepers and then began attacking whites
who lived in the surrounding countryside, as they
slowly made their way toward the Spanish fort at St.
Augustine, Florida. The slaves believed they would
receive freedom and sanctuary from the Spanish,
who had long encouraged runaway slaves from the
British colonies. In a fateful coincidence, the rebels
encountered the mounted party of Lieutenant Governor William Bull, Sr., and his entourage. The lieutenant governor and his party evaded capture and
made their way on horseback to sound the alarm.
Meanwhile, the rebellious slaves, flushed with both
their success and seized liquor, encamped. They
raised a banner and beat drums in an effort to attract
more slaves to their revolt and by afternoon, their
numbers had increased to between sixty and one
679

Students for a Democratic Society

hundred. At the same time, the white militia had
mustered and embarked for the African camp. Possessing superior numbers, training, and firepower,
the militia overwhelmed the slaves in a brief, fierce
fight. About a dozen of the rebels were killed by the
first volley and most of the rest were caught while
others fled into the countryside. The escapees were
pursued for a week before a large group of them was
caught and killed 30 miles south of the original
struggle. Others managed to evade capture for
months and one slave was captured more than two
years after the uprising. Most of those captured
were interrogated, tried, and summarily executed.
The Stono Rebellion generated considerable
conspiracy-minded hysteria in South Carolina. More
than twenty whites had been killed with relative ease
during the uprising. The slaves had acted in a manner that demonstrated prior planning and discussion,
and without Lieutenant Governor Bull’s chance
encounter with the rebels, the devastation to the
colony could have been far worse. A state of emergency prevailed in Stono through the winter, as fears
remained elevated and the white colonists passed
rumors of further revolts.
In the aftermath of the uprising, South Carolina
took several steps in an effort to control its African
majority. The first was a stronger and more regular
system of patrols, greatly expanding the power of the
militia. In the spring of 1740, a thorough revision of
the colony’s slave codes was enacted. Slaves would
now be held as personal chattel, enabling stricter
control over humans held as property. Furthermore,
prohibitions on slave assemblies and gatherings, on
teaching Africans to write, and on possessing liquor
were all reinforced. However, the new slave code
also mandated that masters provide their slaves with
adequate clothing and prohibited masters from
requiring work on Sundays. In an effort to limit the
number of Africans entering the colony, especially
because it was believed that recently arrived slaves
had led the rebellion, a duty of £100 was enacted for
each new African imported during the next three
years. It was hoped that this duty would sharply
reduce the number of blacks entering the colony and
help the colony to achieve a white majority population. Despite these efforts, South Carolina had little
680

success in attracting white settlers to the colony. The
black majority persisted and legislative efforts to curtail the activities of black slaves largely failed.
The Stono Rebellion remains the bloodiest known
conspiracy of African slaves in North America. In the
eyes of whites living in South Carolina and other
colonies with significant enslaved populations, it
highlighted what could happen if the vigilant control
of blacks was relaxed, and fueled a conspiracyminded fear of future slave uprisings.
Jonathan Mercantini
See also: Slave Revolts.
References
Thornton, John. 1991. “African Dimensions of the
Stono Rebellion.” American Historical Review.
96: 1101–1113.
Wood, Peter. 1974. Black Majority: Negroes in
South Carolina from 1670 through the Stono
Rebellion. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

Students for a Democratic Society
Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) was established in 1960 in Ann Arbor, Michigan, as an outgrowth of the Student League for Industrial
Democracy (SLID), the youth affiliate of the Old
Left organization League for Industrial Democracy
(LID). Believing that “industrial democracy” was
too narrow and outdated a term, young members of
the SLID felt a need to break with the older labororiented leadership of the LID and establish an
organization that not only saw the political power of
working-class unions, but also realized the importance of organizing middle-class students in the
struggle for social justice. Under the leadership of
two recent University of Michigan graduates, Al
Haber and Tom Hayden, the SDS became a small
but increasingly influential network of campus
activists that organized students around such issues
as civil rights throughout the early 1960s.
In June 1962, approximately fifty SDS members
gathered in Port Huron, Michigan, to draft a guiding
document for the fledgling organization. The finished document, which became known as the Port
Huron Statement, was a detailed examination of the
arms race, the cold war, racism, capitalism, and the

Students for a Democratic Society

future of U.S. government. Drafted primarily by
Hayden, the Port Huron Statement highlighted the
SDS’s intellectual debt to such thinkers as Albert
Camus, Paul Goodman, and especially C. Wright
Mills. While never fully embracing any sort of conspiracy theory, early SDS literature did refer rather
ominously to such groups as “the power elite” (a
phrase borrowed from Mills), the members of which
held the highest positions of authority in the realms
of big business, the federal government, the press,
and the nation’s largest and most prestigious universities. The worldview of such elites, according to
SDS leaders, was termed “corporate liberalism,” a
philosophy of governance described by one historian
as “a smooth blend of demotic sophistry, symbolic
legislation, and fantasies of endless consumption”
(Kazin, 197). Such a philosophy alienated people
from the political process and kept them from questioning the validity of U.S. forms of government—an
outcome that corporate liberals welcomed and
strove to maintain. What was needed to challenge
such apathy, according to Hayden and other SDS
members, was a turn toward “participatory democracy,” where the governed could govern themselves
directly and begin to see through the rhetoric and
propaganda of the corporate liberal order.
By 1965, the focus of the SDS had become foreign affairs, specifically U.S. policy on the burgeoning conflict in Vietnam. Although the SDS did not
often assume organizational responsibility, “it was
symbolically and politically at the center” of the antiwar movement (Breines, 12). As the SDS became
more and more concerned with issues of U.S. foreign policy, it displayed a greater willingness to turn
to concepts of conspiracy to describe global events.
At the heart of this turn to conspiratorial thinking
was the SDS’s growing disillusionment with the
country’s universities. Due to their connections and
cooperation with the government in the form of military research, as well as military and corporate
recruitment, SDS members now saw such universities as willing participants in the expansion of U.S.
imperialism. Not only were university researchers
conspiring with corporate leaders to create new
weapons of mass destruction, but these institutions
of higher learning were also indoctrinating students

to become unquestioning cold warriors. Knowing
that much of the public would disagree with such
policies, university officials (and their counterparts
in the worlds of business and government) worked
to conceal their involvement in the Vietnam War
and to suppress the voices of those who attempted
to draw attention to such attempted cover-ups.
Here, history has supported SDS’s turn toward conspiracy. Many universities did attempt to cover up
their involvement with the war effort, and the June
1971 publication of the Pentagon Papers revealed
that U.S. leaders had frequently misled and often
outright lied to the American people regarding policies dealing with the Vietnam conflict.
By 1968 the intensity of the political situation
domestically and internationally moved many in the
SDS toward a militant revolutionary program and
rhetoric, and toward a greater reliance on conspiracy
theory. In the aftermath of the bloody confrontations
at the Chicago Democratic convention in the summer of 1968, most SDS members abandoned whatever hopes they still cherished of reforming the existing political system. Declaring themselves allies of
Third-World Communist revolutionaries like Mao
Tse-Tung and Che Guevara, as well as domestic
groups such as the Black Panthers, SDS leaders now
conceived their principal role as one of “bringing the
war home” to an “imperialist mother country” that
now actively conspired against them. In 1969, the
SDS collapsed as small, self-proclaimed revolutionary vanguards squabbled over control of the organization. One such group was the Weathermen, who
believed that the capitalist, imperialist conspiracy
against them was so large and well funded that they
had no choice but to “go underground” and launch a
guerrilla assault on the U.S. political system. As the
Weathermen spiraled into a pattern of increased
paranoia, they began to believe that the only answer
to such an all-encompassing conspiracy was a campaign of violence and intimidation, a campaign that
ultimately ended with three members accidentally
blowing themselves up while constructing bombs in a
Greenwich Village townhouse in March 1970 (Sale).
Such paranoia, however, was not entirely unwarranted, as there is evidence that a number of groups
did conspire against the SDS. Throughout the orga681

Subliminal Advertising

nization’s history, such figures as FBI director J.
Edgar Hoover, believing the SDS itself to be a part
of a Communist conspiracy to infiltrate the United
States, actively monitored SDS membership and
activity. Hoover ordered SDS phones to be tapped,
and the FBI also secretly solicited students to work
as undercover agents infiltrating SDS chapters.
Across the nation, numerous SDS chapters suffered
daily harassment and surveillance by local law officials, often with the support of the FBI. While such
realities do not fully explain the SDS’s turn to violence, they make it easier to see the appeal of conspiracy theory to many of the group’s members.
Michael H. Carriere
See also: Black Panthers; Civil Rights Movement;
Cold War; Hoover, J. Edgar; Weathermen.
References
Breines, Wini. 1982. Community and Organization
in the New Left: 1962–1968, The Great Refusal.
South Hadley, MA: J. F. Bergin Publishers.
Gitlin, Todd. 1987. The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days
of Rage. New York: Bantam Books.
Kazin, Michael. 1995. The Populist Persuasion: An
American History. New York: BasicBooks.
Sale, Kirkpatrick. 1973. SDS. New York: Vintage
Books.

Subliminal Advertising
Although there has been no scientific research that
has ever proven the effectiveness of any form of subliminal influence on the human mind, subliminal
advertising is a conspiracy theory that has entered
popular culture as a generally accepted truth. In the
main, this is a result of a general cultural paranoia
over the rise of the media industry to a position
where it dominates the production of cultural meaning and ideology in society. The fact that most media
forms (television, radio, newspapers, and films) are
dominated by large companies or corporations, in
addition to their commercial and mass imperatives,
creates an anxiety over their apparently systematic
control of the beliefs and political opinions available
in society.
The fear of subliminal advertising unsurprisingly
begins in the 1950s at the inception of the television
682

age, although the first claims about its use actually
involve the broadcast of subliminal messages at cinemas. Vance Packard was the person responsible for
bringing subliminal advertising to the public’s attention in his 1957 book, The Hidden Persuaders,
when he mentioned experiments undertaken by an
advertising executive, James Vicary. Vicary had
apparently tested subliminal advertising in cinemas
by flashing the messages “Eat Popcorn” and “Drink
Coke” on the screen for a fraction of a second. As a
result of these trials, Vicary claimed an 18 percent
increase in sales of Coke and a 58 percent rise for
popcorn, which led not only to an acceptance of the
reality of the effectiveness of subliminal advertising,
but also to fears that the U.S. public was being
insidiously brainwashed simply by going to the cinema or watching television. An investigation was
launched by the Federal Communications Commission and a ban on the use of subliminal advertising was imposed in some U.S. states as well as in
Britain and Australia.
A few years later, Vicary admitted that he had
exaggerated the impact of subliminal advertising
and, indeed, that there had been no noticeable effect
on the tested cinema-goers. However, subliminal
advertising had already become accepted as a “fact”
(62 percent of Americans currently believe in its existence) and has remained as a pervasive cultural paranoia that has reappeared at various times. For example, the liberalization of U.S. society as a result of the
1960s counterculture led to fears that media industries were using subliminal messages not to brainwash people into buying certain products, but to corrupt the minds of the public. In a series of books,
published from the 1970s onward, Wilson Bryan Key
claimed that both television and print advertising
contain subliminal commands that bombard Americans with images of sex, drugs, and death. According
to Key, groups of people he tested felt sexually
aroused when shown certain adverts, including one
for Gilbey gin in which the word “sex” is apparently
embedded in an ice cube. When he was later called
to give “expert” testimony at the Judas Priest trial in
Reno, Nevada, in 1990, he even went as far as claiming that Ritz crackers had subliminal messages
imprinted on them.

Survivalism

In recent years, attention has moved away from
advertising to a more pervasive fear of subliminal
messages in commercial and cultural products. The
Columbine killings led to a fear that contemporary
music (notably Marilyn Manson) included messages
that were having an effect on the unconscious minds
of American youth. This, however, was a continuation of paranoias that had begun with the trial of the
heavy metal band Judas Priest when they were
accused of placing subliminal messages in one of the
songs from their Stained Class album. These messages had allegedly induced suicidal impulses in two
teenage listeners, James Vance and Ray Belknap,
who had, as a result, attempted to kill themselves.
Although the band were found not guilty of any
wrongdoing (which may be fortunate for Nike, as the
phrase at issue was “Do It”), the fact that a trial took
place at all demonstrates how far subliminal messages have become accepted as a reality.
The reason for this general belief in subliminal
advertising and unconscious commands is primarily a
result of fears that media industries have too much
power in the creation of American values and have
replaced traditional values (such as religion and the
family) with a secular and materialist ideology. The
implications of brainwashing that attach to subliminal
advertising have also led to a belief that the mass
media is in the service of a government propaganda
machine or in the hands of a conspiracy group that is
attempting to corrupt American minds in order to
make its “perverted” values acceptable when it comes
to power. Most frequently this is the New World
Order (with its anti-American totalitarian vision), but
other groups are also seen to be using the media, such
as the Illuminati or Skull and Bones, both of whom
wish to impose a satanic or occult religion on America.
Fran Mason
See also: Mind Control.
References
Kelly, Dan. 2000. “Hi-Tech Market Research.” In
Apocalypse Culture II, ed. Adam Parfrey. Venice,
CA: Feral House.
Key, Wilson Bryan. 1974. Subliminal Seduction.
New York: Signet.
Moore, Timothy E. 1996. “Scientific Consensus and
Expert Testimony: Lessons from the Judas Priest
Trial.” Skeptical Inquirer 20: 6.

Packard, Vance. 1985. The Hidden Persuaders. New
York: Pocket Books.

Survivalism
Survivalism is the practice of disaster preparedness.
Although there are many types of survivalists, all
believe that the collapse of society is imminent,
either as a result of man-made disasters like nuclear
holocaust or overpopulation, or natural disasters such
as earthquakes, floods, and famine. Survivalist practices range from the merely cautious (the building of
bomb shelters during the 1950s or stockpiling water
and canned goods in anticipation of Y2K) to the conspiratorial (preparing for a coming race war or biblical apocalypse). Kurt Saxon, a survivalist writer,
claims to have coined the term in the 1970s. Saxon
(given name Don Sisco) is a former John Birch Society member, and the author of numerous selfpublished books and pamphlets, including The Poor
Man’s James Bond, a guide to homemade explosives,
and Granddad’s Wonderful Book of Chemistry, featuring methods of home manufacturing of bombs.
Saxon gained notoriety in 1970 after appearing before a Senate subcommittee investigating bombings
and terrorism.
Since the late 1970s and early 1980s, survivalism
has become closely associated with several white
supremacist groups, like the Posse Comitatus, the
Christian-Patriots Defense League, the Covenant,
Sword, Arm of the Lord, and Aryan Nations. Unlike
Saxon, an atheist whose writings often debunk conspiracy theories favored by right-wing extremists,
members of these groups subscribe to Christian
Identity theology, which teaches that Aryans are the
true Israelites and that Jews are the literal children of
Satan. Believing that the United States is on the verge
of collapse and a race war, in the 1980s several of
these groups created armed compounds in rural
enclaves. They stockpiled food, water, and weapons
and began paramilitary training in preparation for the
defense of the white race against the forces of the
Zionist Occupied Government (ZOG), a Jewishcontrolled shadow government they believed was
amassing United Nations troops near the U.S.–
Canadian border. Many of these groups disbanded in
683

Survivalism

the mid-1980s, after well-publicized skirmishes with
federal authorities: leaders of the Posse Comitatus
and the Covenant, Sword, and Arm of the Lord were
convicted after separate shootouts with the FBI in
rural Arkansas in 1983 and 1985 respectively. Aryan
Nations and various splinter groups persist, however,
with the movement energized after the incidents in
Ruby Ridge, Idaho, and Waco, Texas.
Jeff Insko

684

See also: Aryan Nations; Posse Comitatus; Ruby
Ridge; Waco; ZOG.
References
Lamy, Philip. 1996. Millennium Rage: Survivalists,
White Supremacists, and the Doomsday
Prophecy. New York: Plenum Press.
Zellner, William L. 1995. Countercultures: A
Sociological Analysis. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Website
Kurt Saxon: http://www.kurtsaxon.com/index.htm.

T
Tobacco Industry
The tobacco industry has recently been accused of
covering up the extent of its knowledge about the
harmful effects of smoking, but tobacco has a long
history in the United States. English settlers in Virginia began cultivating tobacco in 1612. It was first
exported to England in 1619, and its use soon became widespread on both sides of the Atlantic. The
first clinical report linking tobacco use to cancer was
made in 1761 by an English physician, Dr. John Hill,
and an antitobacco movement was in full swing by
the middle of the following century. During the
Industrial Revolution, cigarette manufacturing was
achieved on a mass scale, and by 1880 a billion cigarettes were being sold in the United States each year.
Following World War I, medical researchers began
to accumulate growing evidence that smoking was
leading to a variety of diseases, particularly lung cancer, which had once been considered quite rare but
was increasingly being noted as a cause of death. The
first large-scale scientific study of smoking appeared
in the Journal of the American Medical Association in
1950, and marked the beginning of a heated and protracted battle between the tobacco industry and
opponents of smoking. It soon became apparent that
cigarettes could not be sold to the public simply by
asserting that they were mild and good tasting.
Since cigarettes have always been a legal product,
it is difficult to construe their mere manufacture and
sale to the public as a conspiracy. If the tobacco
industry is guilty of any conspiracy, it must be found
in the way in which the industry has portrayed its

products to the public. In 1994, a tobacco industry
insider leaked thousands of pages of documents that
shed new light on the industry’s marketing activities
(Glantz et al.). The creation in 1954 of the Tobacco
Industry Research Committee, which at the time
was announced as a means of funding scientific research on the medical effects of tobacco, was exposed by the documents as a public relations scheme
designed to provide a counterbalance to the growing
evidence of a link between tobacco use and cancer.
The committee (renamed the Council for Tobacco
Research in 1964) made the argument that the supposed link was supported only by a statistical correlation that failed to prove causality, and claimed that
only through additional research could the controversy be resolved. It continued to make this argument even as medical evidence piled up.
The Industry on the Defensive
When the Surgeon General’s Advisory Committee
on Smoking and Health concluded in its historic
1964 report that “smoking contributes substantially
to mortality,” and that “appropriate remedial action”
was called for, the tobacco industry faced a grave crisis that prompted a strong attack on the report and a
vigorous defense of smoking, and the industry was
clearly—and permanently—put on the defensive.
In1966 a mild warning label was placed on cigarette
packages, but in 1970 it was strengthened to a warning that “The Surgeon General has determined that
cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health,” and
all cigarette advertising was halted on radio and tele685

Toledo War

vision (Whelan). One key issue facing the industry
was the question of whether nicotine, a key ingredient in cigarettes, is addictive. Publicly, the industry
took the position that it is not, as that meant that
smoking is strictly voluntary and smokers can stop
smoking whenever they decide that their health
might be at risk. The industry’s own in-house research, however, had shown that increasing levels of
nicotine are required to maintain its satisfying effect,
and one of the documents leaked in 1994 contained
a statement by an industry lawyer admitting that
“nicotine is addictive” (Glantz et al.).
Another tactic adopted by the industry was to
defend the “right to smoke,” which it touted as if it
were a basic civil right under siege by the forces of
tyranny. In some cases, articles defending smoking
appeared in popular publications without the public knowing that their authors were tobacco industry hirelings. At the same time, industry lawyers
played an important role in deciding what scientific
research would be funded.
To lessen its apparent responsibility for any harm
to the health of smokers, the tobacco industry
claimed that its advertising was aimed at getting
people to switch brands rather than take up smoking, but a variety of methods were used to promote
smoking in subtle ways. For example, payments
were made in exchange for the showing of characters smoking in movies, and the industry cooperated
with makers of candy cigarettes who were willing to
make their packages resemble actual cigarette packages (and thus entice young smokers).
In the realm of conspiracy theory, it seems that
conspiracies are often charged, and even proved in
the “court of public opinion,” without any validation
in the legal system. The tobacco industry proved to
be an exception to this. After years of successfully
evading lawsuits, the industry was finally hit hard by
court judgments that reflected a widespread acceptance of the notion that it had pursued a conspiracy
of silence and deceit about the harms of smoking.
Although some far-fetched charges went unproved
(for example, the theory that Bill Clinton, a president who had taken a hard line toward the tobacco
industry, faced an impeachment effort that was
engineered by the industry’s Republican allies), big
686

tobacco’s decades-long campaign to deny culpability for harming the public’s health proved transparent, and in 1998 five tobacco companies agreed to
pay state governments $256 billion over a period of
twenty-five years to compensate for the cost of providing medical care to persons made ill by tobacco
products. Moreover, a string of civil suits resulting
in billions of dollars in awards to plaintiffs made it
clear that the tobacco industry had secured a place
at the top of the list of corporate supervillains.
Larry Haapanen
See also: Corporations; Health Scares.
References
Glantz, Stanton, John Slade, Lisa A. Bero, Peter
Hanauer, and Deborah E. Barnes. 1996. The
Cigarette Papers. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Hilts, Philip J. 1996. Smoke Screen: The Truth
behind the Tobacco Industry Cover-Up. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley.
Whelan, Elizabeth S. 1984. A Smoking Gun: How
the Tobacco Industry Gets Away with Murder.
Philadelphia, PA: George F. Strickley.

Toledo War
A long-running border dispute between Michigan
and Ohio was eventually settled through a clandestine operation. At 1 A.M. on 7 September 1835,
Colonel Mathias Van Fleet chose thirty of his best
Ohio militiamen, each armed with a musket and two
pistols. They rode into Toledo with members of the
Lucas County Court to enforce the orders of Governor Robert Lucas. By candlelight and with guards
standing watch, the court conducted its business in
secret session. This covert meeting of Ohio officials
exercising jurisdiction within the disputed Toledo
Strip virtually settled the boundary controversy that
had raged for years with numerous skirmishes
threatening confrontation between the militias of
the state of Ohio and the territory of Michigan.
The issue that led to hostilities over the Ohio–
Michigan boundary resulted from an inaccurate
survey and conflicting language in four documents.
As Michigan moved closer to statehood, the precise
boundary became increasingly important.

Toledo War

The Northwest Ordinance of 1787 provided for
the admission of three states, Ohio, Indiana, and
Illinois, and specified that “if Congress shall find it
expedient, they shall have the authority to form one
or two [additional] states in that part of the said
[Northwest] Territory, which lies north of an east
and west line drawn through the southerly bend or
extreme of Lake Michigan” (1 Stat. 51).
The Ohio Enabling Act of 30 April 1802, as
passed by Congress and signed by the president, set
the northern boundary of Ohio as: “an east and west
line drawn through the southerly extreme of Lake
Michigan, running east after intersecting the due
north line from the mouth of the Great Miami
River, until it shall intersect Lake Erie, or the territorial line, and thence with the same through Lake
Erie to the Pennsylvania line” (2 Stat. 173).
On the advice of an old fur trapper who was
familiar with the remote area in question, the Ohio
Constitutional Convention added section 6 to Article VII of its new constitution, proclaiming:
That if the southerly bend or extreme of Lake
Michigan should extend so far south, that a line
drawn due east from it should not intersect Lake
Erie, or if it should intersect said Lake east of the
mouth of the Miami river of the Lake, then and in
that case, with the assent of the Congress of the
United States, the northern boundary of the State
shall be established by, and extend to, a direct line
running from the southerly extremity of Lake
Michigan to the most northerly cape of the Miami
Bay, Maumee, after intersecting the due north line
from the mouth of the Great Miami river as
aforesaid, thence, northeast to the Territorial line
and by the said Territorial line to the line of
Pennsylvania. (2 Stat. 201)

When Congress admitted Ohio to statehood, it
accepted the Ohio Constitution with the addition of
section 6, but it did not expressly approve the added
section.
Louis Joliet’s eighteenth-century map of the
Great Lakes created the error. John Mitchell, a Virginia botanist, physician, and fellow of the Royal
Society, accepted Joliet’s plot when he mapped

western America for the British Lords of Trade. His
drawing became the authority for the Proclamation
Line of 1763 and the Peace Treaty of 1782. Thomas
Hutchins, geographer-general of the United States,
endorsed it. The error in the maps arose from the
mistaken belief that a line of latitude drawn eastward from the southern tip of Lake Michigan would
strike Lake Erie somewhere north of Maumee Bay.
Lake Michigan actually extends so far that a line of
latitude drawn eastward from its southern extremity
strikes Lake Erie southeast, not north, of Maumee
Bay.
In 1807, 1809, and 1811 the Ohio legislature instructed the state’s congressional delegation to have
the national government fix its boundary line. On 20
May 1812, Congress directed the surveyor-general to
mark the boundary on a due east-west line, but the
War of 1812 prevented immediate action. After the
war, on 22 August 1816, Deputy Surveyor William
Harris discovered that a line due east from the most
southern point of Lake Michigan intersected Lake
Erie seven miles south of the most northerly cape of
Maumee Bay. Harris plotted a line directly from the
southern tip of Lake Michigan to the northern cape
of Maumee Bay in conformity with section 6 of the
Ohio Constitution, not in accordance with the state’s
enabling act.
The next year Governor Lewis Cass of the Michigan Territory protested that the line took a strip of
land, including the city of Toledo, “seven miles and
forty-nine chains” wide from Michigan and gave it
to Ohio. On 24 June 1818, Secretary of the Treasury
William H. Crawford agreed with Cass and directed
the commissioner of the Land Office to have the
northern boundary of Ohio redrawn to agree with
the order of 1812.
The controversy continued for years. Then, as
progress halted in Congress, a newly appointed acting governor of the Territory, twenty-seven-yearold, Virginia-born Stevens T. Mason, sent a letter to
Ohio governor Lucas, stating that his legislature
had passed a law on 26 December 1834 opposing
any measures to rob Michigan of its soil. He said he
had appointed three commissioners to meet with a
like number from Ohio to adjust the boundary. On
6 February 1835, Governor Lucas informed his leg687

Toledo War

islature of Mason’s proposal. He said he did not
wish to appoint any commissioners and requested
the legislature to declare Ohio authority all the way
to the Harris line and to direct local officials to exercise jurisdiction over the Toledo Strip. Michigan
responded with a statute of 12 February 1835 “to
prevent foreign jurisdiction” within the limits of its
territory, providing penalties of $1,000 fine or five
years’ hard labor or both for persons other than
Michigan officials exercising authority in the area.
The confrontation grew. Both sides anticipated
armed conflict. On 9 March, Governor Mason wrote
to General Joseph W. Brown, commander of the
Michigan Militia Third Division:
[Y]ou will perceive that a collision between Ohio
and Michigan is now inevitable, and you will
therefore be prepared to meet the crisis. . . . You
will use every exertion to obtain the earliest
information of the military movements of our
adversary, as I shall assume the responsibility of
sending you such arms, etc., as may be necessary for
your successful operation, without waiting for an
order from the Secretary of War, so soon as Ohio is
properly in the field. (Killits, 140)

Governor Lucas with members of his staff and
General John Bell, commanding the 17th Division
of the Ohio Militia, marched into Perrysburg in the
disputed territory with surveyors to begin marking
the Harris line on 31 March.
Michigan conducted three raids. Between midnight and 3 A.M. on the morning of 8 April, the sheriff of Monroe County and his posse rode into
Toledo, broke into two homes, and seized a couple
of people. Three days later they returned, pulled
down Ohio’s flag, dragged it through the streets,
threatened some of the residents, and indicted several persons for holding Ohio office. Another assault
of nearly 200 posse men failed to take any prisoners
since most officers had fled.
As the armies prepared to engage, the president
appointed two commissioners, Richard Rush of
Pennsylvania and Colonel Benjamin C. Howard of
Maryland, who arrived in Perrysburg on 6 April.

688

They conferred with the governors, examined a few
witnesses, ordered running the Harris line, and recommended to the residents of the area that they
should choose which authority to obey. But on 25
April a Michigan force of over fifty men captured
nine members of the survey party after firing about
forty shots, one piercing the clothes of a surveyor.
Hostilities continued. On 15 July the deputy sheriff of Monroe County, Michigan, rode into Toledo
and made 150 arrests. When the deputy tried to
arrest Two Stickney, the man drew his knife and
inflicted a 4-inch slash to the hand of the Michigan
officer. Later that day Michigan forces returned,
broke into the local newspaper, demolished its press,
and arrested Stickney and six or seven others.
On 6 September Governor Mason invaded Toledo
with an armed militia of 1,200. They threatened to
burn the town, shot a horse, again damaged the
newspaper office, and set fire to a cornfield. Even
after the secret 7 September meeting a few skirmishes continued. For example, on 9 September a
Michigan sheriff captured an Ohio sheriff in a 100shot battle in which one man was wounded.
President Jackson removed Mason from office
and appointed a new territorial governor to create
harmony. Then, in October the people of Michigan
petitioned Congress for statehood, adopted a constitution, and elected Mason their first governor. On 2
March 1836, the House Judiciary Committee reported a bill to admit Michigan to the Union, minus
the 500-square-mile Toledo Strip but with the
20,000-square-mile Upper Peninsula. The bill became enmeshed in the slavery controversy, so that
Michigan, a free state, was eventually paired with
Arkansas, a slave state. Finally, on 7 January 1837,
Toledo held a gala celebration as part of Ohio, and
Michigan was admitted to statehood on 26 January
1837.
JeDon A. Emenhiser
References
Emenhiser, JeDon A. 1962. “Armed Politics: An
Analysis and Comparison of Six Cases.” Ph.D.
diss., University of Minnesota.
Killits, John M. ed. 1923. Toledo and Lucas County
Ohio, 1623–1923. Chicago, IL: S. J. Clarke.

Tonkin Gulf Incidents

Tonkin Gulf Incidents
On 31 July 1964, the United States navy destroyer
Maddox began reconnaissance patrols off the coast
of North Vietnam. Its presence in the Gulf of Tonkin
was a major catalyst in bringing about overt U.S. military participation in Vietnam. At first, President
Johnson politically profited from the Tonkin Gulf
incidents, receiving a swell of support for his decisive action against supposed enemy aggression.
Later, however, it became increasingly clear to the
U.S. Congress and the American public that they
had been misled about the events leading up to the
alleged incident. Further, the uncertainty surrounding the Tonkin Gulf incidents soon began to feed
into a popular conspiracy theory that the attacks
were deliberately provoked in order to escalate U.S.
involvement in the conflict.
On 2 August 1964, the first open confrontation
between Democratic Republic of Vietnam forces and
the U.S. military took place when three North Vietnamese patrol boats attacked the Maddox in the Gulf

of Tonkin. When the Maddox returned fire two of the
enemy vessels fled, while one was sunk. This attack
by the North Vietnamese, however, was not unprovoked. The Maddox had been operating in North
Vietnamese territorial waters (which the U.S. government denied), as part of a string of covert operations
(the DeSoto Missions) against the North Vietnamese
coast. While not technically an electronic espionage
ship, the Maddox was outfitted with additional electronic surveillance equipment and personnel to monitor Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV) radio
communications. These missions, part of a campaign
code-named OPLAN-34A (Operations Plan 34
Alpha), consisted of attacks carried out by Republic
of Vietnam (RVN) ships, but coordinated by the U.S.
Navy. One of these missions included the shelling of
two Democratic Republic of Vietnam coastal islands
on the night/early morning of 30–31 July. On the following night, the Maddox approached one of the
islands that had been shelled, apparently in an effort
to ascertain the extent of enemy defenses for the

USS Maddox (DD-731) at sea. (Library of Congress)

689

Torbitt Document

planning of future missions. After being harassed by
the Maddox, the North Vietnamese dispatched three
torpedo boats that launched an unsuccessful attack.
On 3 August 1964, the Maddox was joined by a
second U.S. navy destroyer, the C. Turner Joy, and
continued patrolling the Gulf of Tonkin. This assignment, however, was carried out much farther from
the North Vietnamese coast than the Maddox’s mission of the night of 30–31 July. The following
evening, while still operating in the gulf, radarmen
aboard the C. Turner Joy picked up “blips” on their
screens, which they interpreted as attacking enemy
vessels, and fired at these supposed targets. The C.
Turner Joy, however, was unable to pick up sounds of
these ships with its sonar. On the USS Maddox, radar
was unable to discern any enemy attackers, but sonar
detected some noises that were interpreted as North
Vietnamese torpedo motors. As the destroyers fired
at “ghost” targets, carrier aircraft were also called in
and two torpedo boat sinkings were claimed.
Captain John Herrick, patrol commander of the
U.S. forces in the Gulf of Tonkin, immediately expressed doubts that an attack by the DRV had taken
place. However, in Washington, intercepted North
Vietnamese communications were examined and
were said to provide evidence that an attack had
been launched by the DRV. It seems likely, however,
that the messages actually referred to the attack of 2
August, and were misinterpreted by U.S. officials
including President Lyndon Johnson, who had been
reassured by Pacific naval commander Admiral
Ulysses S. Grant Sharp of the authenticity of the
attack. In response, Johnson ordered retaliatory air
strikes (Operation Pierce Arrow) against the North
Vietnamese. The sixty-four sorties destroyed eight
and damaged another twenty-four DRV gunboats
and laid waste to 10 percent of North Vietnam’s oil
storage facilities at a cost of two U.S. aircraft.
Johnson then requested the U.S. Congress to
pass a joint resolution of support for South Vietnam.
The Gulf of Tonkin resolution provided Johnson
with a free hand to escalate U.S. military action in
Southeast Asia that had already been rapidly
increasing since 1961.
Nicholas Turse
See also: Johnson, Lyndon Baines

690

References
Clodfelter, Micheal. 1995. Vietnam in Military
Statistics: A History of the Indochina Wars,
1772–1991. Jefferson, NC: McFarland and
Company.
Krepinevich, Andrew F. 1986. The Army and
Vietnam. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Moise, Edwin E. 1996. Tonkin Gulf and the
Escalation of the Vietnam War. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press.

Torbitt Document
The Torbitt Document, also called the Torbitt Memorandum or just “the Torbitt,” started circulating in
1970. It came in the form of a multigenerational photocopy passed among Kennedy assassination researchers during the time of New Orleans district
attorney Jim Garrison’s JFK investigation. The Torbitt contained information that came from Garrison’s
investigators, but also included material later found
important to Garrison.
Its only photographs were of the three tramps
picked up in the rail yard at Dealey Plaza, which
Garrison had displayed on the Johnny Carson Show
on U.S. television. The Torbitt names these tramps
as Fred Crisman, Thomas Edward Beckham, and
Albert Osborne. According to the Torbitt, the three
were working for a secret group called Defense
Industrial Security Command (DISC), through a
right-wing front group known as the American
Council of Christian Churches. In the film JFK
(1991) Oliver Stone popularized Garrison’s later
attempt to bring a prosection in the Kennedy assassination, but the film left out the main thrust of
Garrison’s arguments, namely that JFK’s death
resulted from espionage within the machinations of
the transnational aerospace industry.
At 157 pages, the Torbitt claims to have information on a wide range of subjects, notably another
secret spy group known as Division Five of the FBI,
and J. Edgar Hoover’s continuing involvement in the
assassination and its cover-up. It also details the
involvement of Werner Von Braun, deputy NASA
administrator, in obtaining the Apollo contract for
North American Aviation in 1961. Von Braun was a

Trilateral Commission

Nazi rocket scientist brought to the United States
under the auspices of Operation Paperclip who
became a leading NASA administrator after the war.
He and his associate Walter Dornberger, mentioned
in the Torbitt as a directing officer of Bell Aerospace, had used slave prison labor at the Nordhausen underground rocket works in Nazi Germany.
The Torbitt also claims that Ferenc Nagy, the former prime minister of Hungary, actually appears on
the Zapruder film of the assassination as the infamous “umbrella man.” The “umbrella man” holds
up an umbrella during the shooting sequence, seemingly to coordinate shots from the grassy knoll, the
book depository, and the Dal-Tex building. Congressional investigators later produced a man named
Louis Stitt as the umbrella man, who claimed he was
trying to use the umbrella as a symbol for Neville
Chamberlain (although that explanation seemed farfetched to some investigators).
A now deceased Texas lawyer named David
Copeland is credited with having pieced together
the Torbitt document and presenting it under the
pseudonym of “William Torbitt” in order to defend
“honest right-wing conservatives” from accusations
that they murdered Kennedy. In original form, the
document contained mismatched, awkward, and
missing references as well as odd capitalization
and punctuation. It was cleaned up for the Internet
and published in book form for the first time in
1996. Conspiracy researcher Robin Ramsay called
it “typical smart-ass CIA stuff to muddy the pool,”
while other theories have emerged that it was disinformation planted by the Soviets to destabilize the
U.S. government. The Torbitt Document only had
one legal challenge, with the publication of the
1996 book, when David Ferrie (the former airline
pilot implicated in Garrison’s investigation of the
Kennedy assassination) sued the publisher for
defamation. The case was thrown out of court.
Kenneth Thomas
See also: Kennedy, John F., Assassination of;
Operation Paperclip.
References
Childress, David Hatcher. 2001. “Lawyers, Guns and
Money.” In A Hitchhiker’s Guide to Armageddon.
Kempton, IL: Adventures Unlimited.

Thomas, Kenneth, ed. 1996. NASA, Nazis and JFK,
The Torbitt Document and the JFK Assassination.
Kempton, IL: Adventures Unlimited.

Trilateral Commission
The Trilateral Commission was the brainchild of
David Rockefeller, chairman of Chase Manhattan
Bank and grandson of John D. Rockefeller. Rockefeller got the idea for the commission after reading
Columbia University professor Zbigniew Brzezinski’s
book Between Two Ages, which called for strengthened alliances between the world’s three dominant
economic regions—North America, Western Europe, and Japan. At Rockefeller’s request, Brzezinski
formed the Trilateral Commission in 1973, its stated
purpose being “to help think through the common
challenges and leadership responsibilities of these
democratic industrialized areas in the wider world.”
The commission, essentially a glorified discussion
group, was originally intended to survive for only
three years—a triennia—but it has continually
elected to renew its mission. Since 1973 its membership has broadened and diversified: the Japan Group
is now the Pacific Asian Group, Mexican members
have been invited into the North American Group,
and the European Group has expanded to accommodate an expanding European Union.
There are two conspiracy theories regarding the
Trilateral Commission. The first theory says that the
Trilateralists schemed to make enormous loans to
Third World nations in the 1970s oil crisis and then
conspired to strengthen the International Monetary
Fund, which would offer additional credit as a way
of guaranteeing their previous loans. The second
and more pervasive Trilateral conspiracy theory dictates that the commission is designing to take over
the world through control of the U.S. presidency.
This idea dates to the commission’s 1973 debut.
Among its initial membership was Georgia governor
Jimmy Carter—who was considering a bid for the
presidency in 1976. Rockefeller and Brzezinski were
so impressed with Carter, the theory holds, that they
began engineering Carter’s eventual victory through
backroom deals and manipulation of media elites.
691

Trusts

Once elected, Carter appointed a number of Trilateralists to his administration, including Cyrus Vance
as secretary of state and Brzezinski as national security advisor. Conspiracy theorists, as upset as they
were about Trilateral machinations in the 1976 elections, were stunned by the field of presidential candidates in 1980, which included two more commission members: Congressman John Anderson and
former United Nations ambassador, CIA director,
and Congressman George H. W. Bush. Theorists
were temporarily relieved when it became clear that
Bush and Anderson were out of the running for the
presidency, but recoiled when Republican nominee
Ronald Reagan named Bush as his running mate
and, when he succeeded Carter, appointed commission member Casper Weinberger as his secretary of
defense. The Trilateral conspiracy theory reached its
apogee in 1984 when Reagan hosted a White House
reception for commission members. Since that time,
however, the Trilateralist conspiracy has lost some of
its appeal, despite the fact that two more commission members have been elected president of the
United States—George Bush, Sr., in 1988 and
William Jefferson Clinton in 1992 and 1996.
R. Volney Riser
See also: Rockefeller Family.
References
Brzezinski, Zbigniew. 1970. Between Two Ages:
America’s Role in the Technetronic Era. New
York: Viking Press.
Robertson, Pat. 1991. The New World Order. Dallas,
TX: Word, Inc.
Website
The Trilateral Commission: http://www.trilateral.org.

Trusts
Since the Civil War and the industrialization of the
United States in the late nineteenth century, the
corporate monopoly, or trust, has been a central
problem in the ongoing struggle between capitalism
and democracy. From the railroads to Microsoft,
economists tend to explain the formation and persistence of trusts as the inevitable result of basic
capitalist processes of accumulation and centralization (such as mergers and acquisitions). Given the
692

extraordinary economic power of amassed wealth, a
monopoly is able to overcome—if not dictate—
what are generally held to be basic market forces
such as pricing, distribution, and demand. But on a
political and even moral level, large sectors of U.S.
society have historically viewed trusts, and the
hugely powerful plutocrats who dominate them
(J. P. Morgan or Bill Gates), as a vast economic conspiracy destined to subvert competition, undermine
democratic freedoms, and enslave society.
Beginning, perhaps, with Andrew Jackson’s fight
against the Bank of the United States before the Civil
War, U.S. popular politics has maintained a deep distrust of centralized economic power. Many historians
have pointed out how the belief in free competition
has long been an essential moral and political component of the national identity and Americans’ sense
of individualism. Following the tremendous economic growth fed by the Civil War, northern industries—led by the railroads—expanded and restructured themselves into the first modern corporate
enterprises. Fueled by major innovations in banking
and finance capitalism, single incorporated entities
began to seize hold of entire industries like steel, oil,
shipping, lumber, tobacco, textiles, and beef. Headed
by a board of trustees and owned by stockholders,
the new corporate trusts generated so much capital
that they easily subsumed the smaller, family-owned
or proprietary capitalists. Shortly before his assassination, Abraham Lincoln is alleged to have warned
the nation of the growing power of the trusts: “I see
in the near future a crisis approaching that unnerves
me and causes me to tremble for the safety of my
country. . . . Corporations have been enthroned, an
era of corruption in high places will follow, and the
money-power of the country will endeavor to prolong its reign by working upon the prejudices of the
people until the wealth is aggregated in a few hands
and the Republic is destroyed.” At their origins, the
modern corporation was seen by union members,
poets, and politicians alike as predatory, insatiable,
totalizing in its influence, and rapidly growing
beyond the power of even the growing federal government to control.
By the 1880s many Americans believed that Lincoln’s warning (or, at the very least, the quotation

Trusts

mistakenly attributed to him) had come to pass and
the “incorporation of America” was complete. The
Gilded Age had given birth to the “Robber Barons,”
a plutocracy of capitalists like J. J. Hill, Andrew
Carnegie, J. P. Morgan, and John D. Rockefeller.
The previously unimaginable personal fortunes of
these few (Rockefeller was the first billionaire in
the world) were proof of the severe inequalities
produced by the trusts. On a political level, these
“Lords of Industry” seemed simply to pull the necessary strings and the powers of state and civil society would bend to meet their every need. To combat this awesome threat, a wide range of popular
social movements spread across the country: labor
unions, farmer’s cooperatives, populists and socialists, middle-class reformers, and a new breed of
investigative journalists, known as Muckrakers.
Together these voices demanded that some limit be
placed upon the power of centralized capital.
In 1890, Congress tried to co-opt this popular
cause by enacting the Sherman Anti-Trust Act. In
the words of Senator Sherman himself, this law was
needed because “the popular mind is agitated with
problems that may disturb the social order.” In the
language of the law itself, the Sherman Anti-Trust
Act declared illegal “every contract, combination in
the form of trust or otherwise, or conspiracy, in
restraint of trade or commerce.” With this phrase,
the Sherman Act seemed to give voice to the popular perception of trusts as criminal conspiracies as
well as vast political conspiracies destined to
restrain freedom. However, in the court of law this
wording is so deliberately loose that many historians
believe that the Sherman Act was never really
designed to effectively limit capital accumulation at
all. In fact, during its first several decades of
enforcement, the “conspiracy in restraint of free
trade” clause of the Sherman Act was more frequently used to ban labor unions than it was to
ensure competition among their employers.
By the Progressive Era, every individual area of
industry was colonized and dominated by an “interlocking directorate” of trusts. “The Trust Question”
was the political problem of the day. In a carefully calculated gesture to popular demands, several politicians including Teddy Roosevelt and Woodrow Wil-

son effectively pitched themselves as “trust busters.”
Wilson especially made his bid for the presidency
with the conspiratorial rhetoric of the antitrust movement, asserting that “an invisible empire has been set
up above the forms of democracy.” Upton Sinclair, a
committed socialist, attacked the dangers behind
beef trust in his novel The Jungle. Muckraking pioneer Ida Tarbell grew famous through her scandalous
exposés of the competitive secrets (such as blowing
up their competitors’ wells) of the Standard Oil corporation. And political cartoonists loved to depict
trusts as an enormous octopus or as a giant plutocrat
grabbing for power. Of course, though some changes
were made, it would take decades for the Justice
Department and the courts to break up effectively
such obvious monopolies as the U.S. Steel Company
or Rockefeller’s Standard Oil.
In the years after World War I, the Sherman Act
was successfully used to break up several major
trusts, including Standard Oil and the American
Tobacco Company. In its day-to-day function, the
Sherman Act proved far more effective as a regulatory statute, preventing mergers and corporate conspiracies before they could occur. In the latter half
of the twentieth century, two of the biggest trusts
effectively busted were the motion picture “Studio
System” and AT&T. And while these antitrust
actions have been decidedly nonconspiratorial, the
1990s witnessed the return of the giant corporate
trust conspiracy in the form of the Clinton administration’s antitrust case against Microsoft. Whether
or not Microsoft constitutes a conspiracy in
restraint of free trade, there is certainly no shortage
of people around the world (mostly hanging out in
Internet chatrooms) who would argue that Microsoft and its sinisterly geeky chairman represent a
vast conspiracy to take over the world—or at least
the computer software market.
Michael Cohen
See also: Bank of the United States; Corporations;
Jackson, Andrew; Microsoft; Populism; Rockefeller
Family.
References
Chandler, Alfred D., Jr. 1977. The Visible Hand: The
Managerial Revolution in American Business.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

693

Turner, Nat

Hofstadter, Richard. 1965. “What Happened to the
Antitrust Movement.” Pp. 188–237 in The
Paranoid Style of American Politics. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Sklar, Martin. 1988. The Corporate Reconstruction
of American Capitalism, 1890–1916. Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
Trachtenberg, Alan. 1982. The Incorporation of
America: Culture and Society in the Gilded Age.
New York: Hill and Wang.

Turner, Nat
Nat Turner (1800–1831), the leader of the 1831
Southampton Conspiracy, was born in Virginia as
the property of Benjamin Turner. His mother was a
first-generation slave born in Africa and took care to
instill a deep resentment of slavery in her son as
well as to pass along traditional African customs,
which included the belief in physical signs of success and greatness that she found on Nat’s face and
body in the form of birthmarks. The Turner family
allowed Nat to be educated alongside their own
children as a playmate and confidante, so that Nat
became literate, and with great scientific curiosity
conducted experiments with explosives, papermaking, and construction.
Financial failures and deaths among the Turner
family, however, meant that Nat lost his favored
place in the master’s family, and was inherited, sold,
and traded to three different groups of relatives,
each time forced to change his surname and accept
the lower status of a field slave. Nat’s activities soon
centered around his lay preaching, based on his
Methodist education but flavored with African traditions and a growing millennialism slaves found
attractive, since it promised them escape from
bondage. A series of visions, beginning in 1828, led
Nat to believe he was a chosen leader, meant to free
the slaves in a violent war against their masters, and
he cultivated the reputation of a holy man, shunning alcohol, tobacco, and rich foods. Far from
restricting his preaching and travels, the Turners
encouraged Nat, since they believed Christianity
helped keep the slaves subdued and obedient, and
they trusted Nat to traverse the area at all hours.
694

During Nat Turner’s lifetime, slave revolts had
been occurring with regularity, including the Andry
plantation insurrection in Louisiana, the failed conspiracy of Denmark Vesey in Charleston, South Carolina, and Gabriel Prosser’s rebellion in Richmond,
Virginia. Nat used his ability to read and to accumulate information in order to study these failed revolts
and plan his own without their flaws. Fearing
betrayal from house servants sentimentally attached
to their master’s families, Nat drew his six lieutenants from the field hands of the Turner and
neighboring plantations and small farms, and organized them in independent cells, without the fatal
knowledge of each other’s existence. Plans for the
coming rebellion remained in Nat’s hands, written in
detail as encoded maps, lists, and prophetic statements, sometimes written on handmade paper in his
own blood.
After seeing an eclipse on 13 August 1831, Nat
believed he had received a sign for the rebellion to
commence. His coconspirators, eager to begin, received their instructions: gather their cells of supporters and move quickly to kill all slave owners as
they moved toward the county seat of Southampton,
Jerusalem, leaving no one alive to warn others. En
route, they would free slaves, secure supplies and
arms, and eventually raise all of Virginia’s enslaved
population in revolt. The men set off in the evening
of 13 August and attacked first their masters’ farms,
then ranged outward, striking with great speed and
discipline, killing the whites and gathering more
rebellious slaves to their cause. Interestingly, the
rebels spared the small farm of a poor white family
without slaves, judging them to be as disadvantaged
as slaves themselves.
The following morning, the bloodied bodies of the
slain were discovered, triggering a panic in which
whites fled their farms, often running into parties of
the rebels, who slaughtered them. The Virginia militia, hastily summoned, moved to defend the county
seat and set up an outpost at Parker’s Farm, one of
the last before the city of Jerusalem. The rebels scattered the first party of men they encountered, but
were thrown into disarray by militia reinforcement
when they attempted to pursue them. Unable to take
the arsenal at Jerusalem, the rebels attacked more

Turner, Nat

The discovery of Nat Turner. (North Wind Picture Archive)

outlying plantations, but had lost their advantage of
surprise, and found themselves hampered by the
slaves roaming the area trying to join them. The militia, meanwhile, called on federal reinforcements
from Fort Monroe, and these fresh, professional soldiers skirmished successfully against the tired, hungry, and poorly supplied rebels.
Nat Turner, hoping to rally his forces for another
assault, went into hiding at Cabin Pond, his original

headquarters, but none of his lieutenants survived to
join him. Federal soldiers, joined by marines from
the port of Norfolk and an enlarged Virginia militia,
scoured the countryside, arresting and then executing sixteen slaves found armed and in revolt. Torture
of prisoners, including Nat’s common-law wife, free
blacks in Richmond, and Turner farm slaves eventually led to Nat’s surrender on 30 October after two
months in hiding. While Nat was imprisoned, his
695

TWA 800

lawyer, T. R. Gray, took a careful account of his experience and the conduct of the rebellion, noting that
the insurrection had not been triggered by any specific mistreatment, but was instead an outpouring of
resentment and rage against the slaveholding system. Gray later published these documents as the
Confessions of Nat Turner. Nat pleaded guilty, refusing to admit any feelings of guilt for the deaths of
approximately sixty slave-owning whites, and was
hanged on 11 November. The state of Virginia paid
his owners a compensation of $375 for the loss of
their property.
The rebellion terrified slave owners and resulted
in the introduction of draconian slave codes
throughout the South, restricting slaves’ ability to
meet in groups, punishing possession of printed
materials thought to inspire rebellion, and increasing border and slave patrols. The state of Georgia
even went so far as to single out abolitionist William
Lloyd Garrison as the chief instigator of the revolt
and offered a reward for his death. The immediate
success of Nat Turner’s rebellion was based on his
ability to conceal his plans and maintain discipline
among his coconspirators. Their defeat at the hands
of the militia and federal troops came only after several days, and was restricted by their inability to
secure more ammunition and supplies. As a rebellion, these men compare favorably to modern guerrilla movements in their effectiveness and their ability to throw the majority population into terror and
disarray.
Margaret Sankey
See also: Slave Revolts.
References
Greenberg, Kenneth, ed. 1996. The Confessions of
Nat Turner and Related Documents. Boston, MA:
Bedford.
Johnson, F. Roy. 1966. The Nat Turner Slave
Insurrection. Murfreesboro, NC: Johnson
Publishing Co.
Oates, Stephen B. 1974. The Fires of Jubilee: Nat
Turner’s Fierce Rebellion. New York: Harper and
Row.
Tragle, Henry Irving. 1971. The Southampton Slave
Revolt of 1831: A Compilation of Source Material.
Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.

696

TWA 800
Trans World Airlines Flight 800, a Boeing 747–131
en route from John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York to Charles De Gaulle International Airport in Paris, exploded in a fireball on 17
July 1996 at 8:31 P.M. All 230 passengers, as well as
the 18 crew, were killed. The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), which was responsible
for the investigation, determined that the probable
cause of the crash was an explosion in the center
wing fuel tank that had a “flammable mixture of
fuel/air” in the tank, although the source of ignition
could not be determined by the investigators. They
theorized that “a short circuit” outside the tank
allowed “excessive voltage to enter it through electrical wiring associated with the fuel quantity indication system.” These and other details were included
in the NTSB’s final report.
Multiple witnesses, however, claimed to have seen
trails that resembled those made by a missile. Many
reported seeing objects “streaking” toward the aircraft. Investigators later explained those “sightings”
as after-the-fact falling debris. Above all, NTSB investigators seemed to have difficulty identifying the
“red residue” on some of the recovered seats—
residue not typical of an internal explosion, but
rather of (depending on the expert) a “pass through”
missile’s exhaust motors or an outside explosion.
Only a few months after the crash, James Sanders,
a former police officer and investigative journalist,
published The Downing of Flight 800, which contended that a U.S. Navy missile, fired from an Aegis
cruiser on exercises in the waters below Flight 800,
had accidentally brought down the aircraft. Among
Sanders’s claims:
• A “bullet-like” entrance and exit wound in the
aircraft cabin
• Thirty-four independent witnesses to a
missile-type streak
• Photographic “proof” of the missile
• An “original” Federal Aviation Administration
radar report that indicated an “unidentified
object” approaching TWA 800, which the
“FBI tried to suppress”

TWA 800

• Confirmation of navy exercises below
• The by-then famous “red residue”
Later, in 2001, Ian Williams Goddard, in Ubiquity
(a magazine for self-touted “mega-IQs”), analyzed
the tests performed by the NTSB, and concluded
that the agency had precluded the question of
whether or not the impact could have been caused
by a missile by adopting test criteria that excluded
missile explosions outside a certain proximity. Goddard claimed that the evidence associated with the
hole showed fragments “moving downward” and
striking TWA 800 behind the center wing tank. Goddard, like Sanders, makes a case for “evidence tampering” by the investigators.
Goddard had been the lead “missile” advisor to
Pierre Salinger, the former ABC newsman who on
8 November 1996 claimed to have evidence that
the navy accidentally shot down TWA 800. Ironically, Salinger offered yet another view of the explosion—rather than a missile, Salinger claimed it was
a kinetic energy or continuous rod–type weapon. Of
course, that undercut Goddard’s theory and, while
the effect of a kinetic energy weapon may have
been to cut the aircraft in half, it would not leave
the “red residue” claimed by Sanders and others.
The evidence assembled by Goddard and
Sanders, as well as many others, appears convincing . . . until compared to each other. Indeed, so far
the greatest single argument against a missile theory
of any one of the conspiracy theorists is the evidence
produced by another. For example, in Sanders’s scenario, the navy fired a BQM-74E drone missile,
which was to be the “target” for a test involving the
Aegis antimissile/antiaircraft defensive systems.
When the navy fired a Standard antimissile missile,
it failed to acquire the drone, and instead acquired
TWA 800, but, lacking a warhead, simply “passed
through” the aircraft, slicing it in half prior to an
explosion some eight seconds later. This “pass
through” missile was, in Sanders’s explanation, what
accounted for the “red residue” on the seats. The
strength of Sanders’s story is that it eliminates
shoulder-fired “Stinger” missiles that might be used
by terrorists because of both the radar signature and

the range limitations of the Stinger. But, according
to Sanders, the FBI encouraged talk of Stinger missiles to throw investigators off the trail of the real
culprit, a rogue navy Standard missile.
However, Ian Goddard maintains that several
witnesses had reported seeing the same missile
trail, in virtually the same spot if their viewpoints
were adjusted for their land location. So far, Goddard’s theory does not contradict Sanders’s. But his
evidence of outside penetration behind the center
fuel tank is starkly contrasted with Sanders’s claim
that the fuselage was penetrated by the Standard
missile in front of the fuel tank. Sanders more accurately accounts for the odd separation of the front
part of the aircraft from the rear, but Goddard more
accurately explains the cause of a midair explosion.
Again, however, there is not radar data to support
either a pass-through missile or a missile that
exploded outside the rear of TWA 800.
The NTSB failed to address either of these allegations, instead testing Stinger missiles and concluding
(some would say, obviously) that the Stingers did not
have the range to reach TWA 800. Thus, mysterious
reports about “escape boats” that might have carried
ground-based terrorists cannot be reconciled with a
“navy-did-it-accidentally” theory. (Both Sanders and
Goddard point out that there were previous suspicious explosions, such as Pan Am 103, which blew up
over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988, leading some to
link TWA 800 with those “attacks” as well.)
But the NTSB also failed to consider other theories that would have proved equally damaging to
the allegations of Sanders and Goddard. Elmer
Barr, for example, contends that a faulty forward
door not only caused the TWA 800 crash, but also
several other (in his view, unexplained) crashes.
Barr does not attempt to explain the “red residue,”
and makes no bones about it, saying he is not a
chemist. However, his timeline of the front-door
collapse tracks more closely with the events of TWA
800 than either the Sanders pass-through missile or
the Goddard outside-explosion scenario.
Two things can be stated with certainty as of 2002
about the TWA 800 crash: there are a number of
unexplained aspects of this case (as there are in every

697

TWA 800

case), and so far, no single piece of physical evidence
or uncorrupted firsthand sworn testimony has been
produced to indict the otherwise admittedly tenuous
NTSB finding. Theories such as Barr’s are intriguing,
but again do not explain other odd elements of the
case. One theory seems to be easily ruled out—that
of a terrorist using a Stinger missile to down the
plane. And, in the wake of the arrest of the London
“shoe-bomber,” it would be worthwhile for the
NTSB or FBI to revisit the cause of the explosion as
perhaps involving such a terrorist strike, as that tactic
was not considered at the time of the explosion.
Larry Schweikart

698

References
MacPherson, Malcolm, ed. 1998. The Black Box:
All-New Cockpit Voice Recorder Accounts of InFlight Accidents. New York: William and Morrow.
National Traffic Safety Board. 2000. Aircraft
Accident Report, TWA 800. #AAR-00/03. www.
ntsb.gov/Pulictn/2000/aar0003.htm.
Negroni, Christine. 2000. Deadly Departure: Why
the Experts Failed to Prevent the TWA Flight 800
Disaster and How It Could Happen Again. New
York: Cliff Street Books.
Sanders, James. 1997. The Downing of TWA Flight
800. New York: Zebra Books.

U
UFOs
Although the modern UFO era dates from Kenneth
Arnold’s 1947 sighting in Washington State, the first
mass sighting of UFOs in the United States took
place between November 1896 and May 1897.
Described as “airships” by the people who witnessed
them, these early UFOs were usually characterized
as silent with white and colored lights, and, like
modern UFOs, were said sometimes to land and,
rarely, to carry occupants. Unlike twentieth-century
UFOs, however, the occupants of nineteenthcentury airships were, with very few exceptions,
described as human. While some theories of the
time speculated that the airships were Martian in
origin, in general the public believed that they were
invented and operated by humans, despite the fact
that the modern dirigible was not developed until
several years later. There was no sense that the government had any additional information about the
phenomenon or that facts were being withheld from
the public—the idea that there is a government conspiracy to hide the truth about UFOs did not
emerge until the twentieth century.
During World War II anomalous lights and aircraft sighted by military pilots as early as 1941 came
to be known as “foo fighters.” The Allies speculated
at the time that they were of German or Japanese
origin, and later discovered that German and Japanese pilots had reported the same phenomena and
had assumed they were Allied craft. In 1946–1948
sightings of what were called “ghost rockets” began
in Sweden. These “rockets” were said to crash on

land and water, and the U.S. and Swedish governments erroneously believed that the Soviets were
firing V-2 rockets taken from the Germans during
the war. The “foo fighters” and “ghost rockets” have
never been fully explained to the satisfaction of
some UFO believers, but the only conspiracies they
suggested were those of enemy countries.
Conspiracy theories about UFOs were born in the
twentieth century, but were not a part of the controversy surrounding the next appearance of spacecraft
on 24 June 1947. Kenneth Arnold, a Boise, Idaho,
businessman and private pilot, saw nine bright objects traveling at a speed he estimated at 1,700 miles
per hour in the area of Mount Rainier, Washington.
The term “flying saucer” was not used by Arnold to
describe what he saw; rather, it was created by a
newspaper writer who adapted it from Arnold’s
description of the crafts’ movements as resembling
“a saucer skipping over water.” The opinion of both
Arnold and the press was that he had seen guided
missiles, and there was no hint of a governmental
effort to deceive the public. On 8 July 1947, the
Roswell, New Mexico, newspaper the Roswell Daily
Record carried the headline “RAAF Captures Flying
Saucer on Ranch in Roswell Region,” but the air
force quickly denied the claim and insisted on 9 July
that what had been found was “the crushed remains
of a ray wind target used to determine the direction
and velocity of winds at a high altitude.” The “Roswell Incident,” as it became known when the story
reemerged as a conspiracy narrative in the late
1970s, later included the assumption that the air
699

UFOs

force had captured the remnants of alien spacecraft
and alien bodies, but at the time it received little
publicity after the air force’s denial. An August 1947
Gallup Poll revealed that while 90 percent of the
American public was familiar with “flying saucers,”
most people believed that they were in actuality
secret weapons or hoaxes.
In December 1947 the United States Air Force
began its first formal inquiry into UFOs. Called Project Sign, it was located at Wright-Patterson Air Force
Base, then known as Wright Field, and had as its scientific consultant Dr. J. Allen Hynek, an astronomer
from Ohio State University who headed the McMillan Observatory. Hynek, who was early on a skeptic,
later became an advocate of the extraterrestrial theory of UFOs, and at the time of Project Sign the air
force contained both terrestrial and extraterrestrial
factions. The two most important cases investigated
by Project Sign were the 7 January 1948 crash of
Kentucky Air National Guard captain Thomas Mantell, whose F-51 crashed as he chased what he
described as a large metallic object (the air force first
claimed he had seen the planet Venus and later
explained the object was a Skyhook balloon), and the
sighting on 24 July 1948, by Clarence Chiles and
John Whitted, who were piloting a DC-3 over
Alabama. Both men, a passenger, and a witness on
the ground reported a cigar-shaped UFO. The
Chiles-Whitted case, as it became known, has never
been explained.
By September 1948 the Project Sign team had
written a top secret “Estimate of the Situation,”
which determined that UFOs were probably extraterrestrial. When the report reached air force Chief
of Staff General Hoyt Vanderberg, he claimed it had
not proven its case, declassified the report, and
ordered all copies burned. No copy of the document
has survived. Later, Project Sign admitted that it
could not explain 20 percent of the cases it chose to
investigate. When on 16 December 1948 Project
Sign was reorganized and renamed Project Grudge,
those supporting the nonterrestrial explanations of
UFOs were in ascendancy, and the air force, which
increasingly considered UFOs a public relations
problem, characterized sightings and reports as
hoaxes, hysterical responses, or misidentifications.
700

One of the first known attempts by the air force to
manipulate media coverage of UFOs came in 1949,
when it cooperated with Sidney Shallett of the Saturday Evening Post to produce a two-part article
that appeared on 30 April and 7 May 1949. The article, which assumed a very skeptical stance toward its
subject, was meant to discourage public interest in
the phenomenon; instead, days after the articles
appeared, UFO reports increased significantly and
Shallett’s piece aroused the interest of retired
marine major Donald Keyhoe, who became a wellknown and aggressive advocate of the extraterrestrial theory of UFOs and a spokesperson for government conspiracy theories. His January 1950 article
in True magazine titled “The Flying Saucers Are
Real” asserted that “living, intelligent observers”
from another planet had been watching the earth for
175 years. The article received a great deal of attention and was followed in March by a second article
arguing for the extraterrestrial explanation of UFOs
written by navy commander Robert McLaughlin.
The release in 1951 of two major motion pictures,
The Day the Earth Stood Still and The Thing, reflected Hollywood’s understanding of increased
public interest in UFOs. Both films, which did well
at the box office, provide the future models for attitudes toward alien involvement in human life: in
The Day the Earth Stood Still the UFO occupant is
concerned with eliminating violence, particularly
nuclear war, on earth, while the creature who
crashes to earth in The Thing is a dangerous and
predatory entity that must be eliminated.
In 1951 Project Grudge was reorganized with
Captain Edward J. Ruppelt, who was less hostile to
UFO research, at its head. Because of increased
sightings in early 1952, the air force changed Project
Grudge’s name to Project Blue Book, and under
Ruppelt’s direction Blue Book began actively investigating UFO reports. During the summer of 1952 one
of the most famous UFO events took place over the
Washington, D.C., area from 10 to 26 July. Objects
reported by commercial pilots, ground observers,
and air force pilots were picked up on radarscopes at
Washington National Airport and Andrews Air Force
Base, and air force jets were sent in pursuit of the
objects, which eluded the aircraft. During a 29 July

UFOs

air force press conference, Major General John Samford stated that the air force believed the incidents
were a result of temperature inversions, an explanation that for the most part satisfied the public and the
media. However, the increased media attention to
UFO reports led to the formation of the first two
civilian UFO research groups, the Civilian Saucer
Investigation group (CSI) of Los Angeles and the
Aerial Phenomena Research Organization (APRO),
headed by Jim and Coral Lorenzen.
By the end of 1952 sightings had decreased, but
the CIA had become involved in UFO reports because it feared that the phenomenon might be dangerous for national security. The Robertson Panel,
which took its name after Dr. H. P. Robertson, was
formed to determine if UFOs posed such a threat.
On 14 January 1953, the panel convened for twelve
hours of study and determined that while UFOs
posed no military threat, they could cause mass hysteria and were taking up too much time to investigate. The panel advised the air force to “debunk”
UFOs in order to reduce public interest and to
begin “education” by the mass media. The panel
concluded that UFOs could “cultivate a morbid
national psychology in which skillful hostile propaganda could induce hysterical behavior and harmful
distrust of duly constituted authority,” and civilian
UFO groups “should be watched because of their
potentially great influence on mass thinking.” The
conclusions of the Robertson Panel, which were
later made public incrementally, created an attitude
of distrust in those who began to suspect the U.S.
government of attempting to hide information about
UFOs. Edward Ruppelt’s departure from Project
Blue Book in 1953 and the proposals of the Robertson Panel meant that serious investigation of UFOs
by the air force effectively ended. Until Blue Book’s
demise in 1969, the air force treated UFO sightings,
for the most part, as a public relations problem.
Several books published in 1953 illustrate the wide
spectrum of opinion about UFOs that was present at
the time. Donald Keyhoe’s Flying Saucers from
Outer Space sold a half million copies; as in his earlier The Flying Saucers Are Real (1950), he maintained that the air force knew that UFOs were extraterrestrial, and he continued to voice this opinion

until his death in 1988. Dr. Donald Menzel, Harvard
astronomer and head of the Harvard Observatory
from 1954 to 1966, published Flying Saucers in
1953, the first of several books that attacked the
extraterrestrial theory of UFOs. Menzel, who
explained UFOs as hoaxes, practical jokes, and interactions between light and atmospheric conditions,
would remain the most vocal and respected UFO
debunker until his death in 1976. Also published in
1953 was “Professor” George Adamski’s Flying
Saucers Have Landed. Adamski was the most famous
member of the contactee movement in the 1950s.
The contactees claimed to have had direct contact
with aliens, who were usually described as tall, blond,
and beautiful, and several contactees insisted that
they had traveled to other planets, usually Venus,
with their intergalactic friends. These aliens were
said to live on utopian planets and to have come to
Earth to spread their message of peace and love to
less evolved human beings. The publicity that surrounded contactees continued to be a problem for
more serious UFO researchers and led to resistance
on the part of UFO civilian research groups to investigate cases that involved UFO occupants.
In 1955 Project Blue Book released Special Report
Number 14, which stated that there was no reason to
believe that UFOs were interplanetary craft and that
most UFOs sightings had mundane explanations.
This was a controversial report that elicited much
criticism from UFO proponents. One year later the
National Investigations Committee on Aerial Phenomena (NICAP), a civilian investigative group, was
formed, and in January 1957 Donald Keyhoe became
its director. Public interest and UFO sightings had
declined by 1958, but the number of reports to Project Blue Book remained between 500 and 600 per
year.
One of the most famous and well-documented
UFO sighting cases occurred on 24 April 1964, in
Socorro, New Mexico. Lonnie Zamora, a policeman, was pursuing a speeding car when he witnessed a landed oval-shaped metallic object from
which two small figures in white coveralls had
emerged. He reported that the craft later elevated
with a roaring sound and disappeared, but left
behind four trapezoid-shaped imprints. The case
701

UFOs

was investigated by J. Allen Hynek for Project Blue
Book and was important in changing his former
skeptical attitudes toward UFOs. The head of Blue
Book at the time, Major Hector Quintanilla,
endorsed Zamora’s reliability as a witness and characterized the incident as “the best documented case
on record” in an article for the CIA journal Studies
in Intelligence. The Zamora case is the only Blue
Book case categorized as “unidentified” that combined a landing, trace evidence, and sighting of
occupants. One result of Zamora’s experience was
that NICAP, like APRO, began to investigate more
seriously reports that involved UFO occupants.
The increased number of sightings from 1965 to
1967 led to a renewed public interest in UFOs. In
August 1965 many sightings in Texas were reported,
and the air force received criticism from a number of
newspapers when it dismissed the objects as stars
and the planet Jupiter. Hynek suggested that the air
force create a panel of nonmilitary scientists to look
into the UFO problem and to recommend a course
of action. The six-member “Ad Hoc Committee to
Review Project Blue Book,” headed by Dr. Brian
O’Brien, met on 3 February 1966. It recommended
strengthening Project Blue Book and that the air
force should begin discussing contracts with universities to investigate UFOs.
Reports from eighty-seven students at Hillsdale
College in Michigan on 20 March 1966 that they
had seen a football-shaped UFO, and a subsequent
sighting in the nearby town of Dexter by five individuals, including two policemen, led to a Blue Book
investigation in which Hynek told a press conference that what was seen was probably “marsh gas.”
This explanation was mocked by the media, particularly by Life magazine and the New Yorker. Republican congressman and minority leader Gerald R.
Ford demanded hearings by the House Armed Services Committee on the subject of UFOs, which
were held on 5 April. Hynek testified that the data
on UFOs accumulated since 1948 “deserves close
scrutiny by a civilian panel of physical and social scientists.” Mendel Rivers, who chaired the committee, and the air force agreed. Harvard University,
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the University of North Carolina, and the University of Cal702

ifornia refused the assignment, but on 6 October
1966, the University of Colorado agreed to undertake the study, with the respected physicist Dr.
Edward U. Condon at its head.
The Condon Report, as it became known, was
given $525,000 to study the UFO phenomenon. It
experienced serious difficulties from the beginning
because it contained warring factions of believers
and nonbelievers, and Condon was criticized for his
attitudes toward UFOs. Unabashedly skeptical, he
tended to focus on contactee claims and made
speeches that ridiculed the subject of UFOs.
Released on 9 January 1969, the 963-page report
concluded that “nothing has come from the study of
UFOs in the past 21 years that has added to scientific knowledge. . . . further extensive study of
UFOs probably cannot be justified in the expectation that science will be advanced thereby.” The
result was the termination of Project Blue Book,
announced by Air Force Secretary Robert C. Seamans on 17 December 1969, who, citing the Condon Report, informed the public that UFOs were
not a threat to national security, that they did not
represent a technology beyond the abilities of
present-day science, and that there was no evidence
that they were extraterrestrial. While most scientists agreed with Condon’s findings, J. Allen Hynek
wrote in the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists that the
report could be compared with “Mozart producing
an uninspiring pot-boiler, unworthy of his talents.”
The end of air force involvement in UFO research
was paralleled by the sharp decline in UFO sightings in the late 1960s and the worsening fortunes of
NICAP, which after a series of financial fiascoes dismissed Donald Keyhoe as its head in December
1969.
In the 1970s, public interest in UFOs once again
lessened, as did membership in civilian UFO groups;
in particular, NICAP’s membership continued to
decline. During this decade the focus shifted from
unexplained spacecraft to other anomalous phenomena such as the Bermuda Triangle, cattle mutilations,
and alien abductions, all of which believers claimed
to be implicated in UFO phenomena. Some speculated an extraterrestrial involvement in missing aircraft in the Bermuda Triangle and that aliens were

UFOs

responsible for livestock found missing blood and
body parts; other theories espoused that the U.S.
government was killing cattle as part of an ongoing
secret experiment with biological weapons or that
the animals were victims of satanic cults.
The original alien abduction story is that of Barney and Betty Hill, who under hypnosis in 1964
related being taken aboard a spacecraft on 19 September 1961, so that small, gray extraterrestrial entities could perform medical experiments upon them.
John Fuller’s book The Interrupted Journey, published in 1966, made the Hills’ story public, but it
was not until the 1970s that abduction stories became more common. Charles Hickson and Calvin
Parker insisted that on 11 October 1973, they were
taken aboard a UFO while fishing in Pascagoula,
Mississippi. Travis Walton claimed that he was
abducted by aliens on 5 November 1975, in the Sitgreaves National Forest near Snowflake, Arizona,
and was returned six days later. Skeptics noted that
Walton’s alleged abduction occurred days after the
made-for-television film of the Hills’ abduction, The
UFO Incident, aired on NBC on 20 October 1975.
While early abduction stories contained references to UFOs, as abduction became more prominent, spacecraft became less important and in some
cases disappeared completely from stories of interactions with aliens. In 1981 New York artist Budd Hopkins published Missing Time, a book that proposed
that Americans were being regularly abducted by
aliens who erased memories of the encounters, but
that these could be retrieved through hypnosis. This
book was followed in 1987 by his Intruders: The
Incredible Visitations at Copley Woods, the story of a
woman named “Kathie Davis” who described being
used by aliens for reproductive purposes. Dr. David
Jacobs, a history professor at Temple University, published Secret Life: Firsthand Accounts of UFO
Abductions in 1992, a book that continued Hopkins’s
speculations into the connections between alien
abduction and the creation of an alien-human hybrid
race; the aliens, Jacobs argued, were harvesting
human DNA and using human women as breeders.
In 1987, horror novelist Whitley Strieber’s Communion: A True Story, a rendering of his experiences
with unearthly “visitors,” became a best-seller that

established the now-stereotypical narrative of alien
activity. The short, large-eyed, large-headed, emotionless gray extraterrestrial was later joined by other
common alien types, including the more predatory
insectoid and reptilian aliens and the tall, benevolent
Nordic types.
In the 1990s Harvard psychiatrist Dr. John Mack’s
involvement in alien abduction research garnered
even more publicity for the phenomenon; his 1994
Abduction: Human Encounters with Aliens and more
recent Passport to the Cosmos: Human Transformations and Alien Encounters (1999) explored the abduction phenomenon as a spiritual quest in which
abductees are instead “experiencers” whose encounters with alien beings are enlightening and beneficial.
Mack found himself at odds with Hopkins and
Jacobs, who continued to insist that alien beings were
conspiring to breed a new species from human DNA.
Mack, along with award-winning MIT physicist
David Pritchard, organized the five-day 1992 Abduction Study Conference at MIT, which resulted in the
publication of C. D. B. Bryan’s Close Encounters of
the Fourth Kind: A Reporter’s Notebook on Alien
Abduction, UFOs, and the Conference at MIT (1995).
Although conspiracy theories of governmental
knowledge of the phenomena had some mention at
this conference, the bulk of the papers and lectures
approached abduction from a psychological and
physiological perspective.
The 1980s also saw the reemergence of the Roswell story in Charles Berlitz and William L. Moore’s
The Roswell Incident (1980), which claimed alien
spacecraft had indeed crashed and been retrieved
by the U.S. military. The release of the MJ-12 document in the spring of 1987, which purported that on
24 September 1947 President Truman set up a
secret group of twelve well-known scientists and
military and governmental experts to deal with
crashed UFOs and the bodies of extraterrestrials,
became the focus of an ever-increasing number of
conspiracy theories about governmental knowledge
of and involvement with extraterrestrials. Two of the
most outrageous theories were those of John Lear,
son of William P. Lear, the aviation expert who
invented the Lear jet, and Milton William Cooper.
John Lear claimed that he had knowledge of
703

UFOs

crashed saucers and that the U.S. military had attempted to learn how to operate these crafts at
secret military installations outside Las Vegas,
Nevada (known as Area 51), and another near
Dulce, New Mexico. The government, according to
Lear’s scenario, cooperated with the aliens in an
exchange of alien technology for permitted abductions of humans; the aliens needed human and cattle DNA both to create android creatures at secret
bases in Nevada and New Mexico and to rejuvenate
their own dying species. One of Lear’s sources was
Robert Lazar, who stated that he saw documents
and photographs of UFOs and alien autopsies while
working at Area 51; Lazar also said that he saw nine
extraterrestrial craft and witnessed some of them in
flight.
Cooper’s imagination exceeded even Lear’s. He
claimed to have seen secret documents that confirmed the existence of crashed spacecraft and alien
corpses, and in his 23 May 1989 document titled
“The Secret Government: The Origin, Identity, and
Purpose of MJ-12” he described a secret government of CIA agents who actually run the U.S. government, unknown even to various presidents of the
United States. A global international group called
the Bilderbergers controls all of the earth and, according to Cooper, Eisenhower signed a treaty with
aliens from the planet of Betelgeuse that allowed the
Betelgeusians to abduct humans for their own purposes; the treaty also established secret underground bases in the Southwest that house thousands
of humans and aliens. Cooper theorized that Secretary of Defense James Forrestal had been murdered
and his death made to appear to be a suicide by the
secret government when he threatened to go public
with his knowledge of U.S. involvement with the
aliens. Cooper’s story, a complex and mind-boggling
combination of science-fiction fantasies, fears of
global takeovers by secret organizations, and speculations about the birth in 1992 of the Antichrist,
together with John Lear’s tales, were as embarrassing to the more mainstream UFO community as had
been the contactee claims of the 1950s. These
“Darkside” theories, as they came to be called, became the basis for the continuing conspiracy narrative of alien abduction and governmental involve704

ment in the Fox Network’s very successful television
series The X-Files.
Reported sightings of UFOs and accusations of
governmental cover-ups continued in the 1990s,
with the most famous example being the Arizona
sightings on 13 March 1997, when a large V-shaped
formation of lights was said to have flown silently
over 300 miles from the Nevada state line through
Phoenix to the north of Tucson. Later that night, a
series of bright lights that hung over Phoenix’s
southern horizon were videotaped by a number of
witnesses. The military explanation was that the Vformation was a squadron of military planes and
that the balls of light were high-intensity flares. As
in so many cases in the past, UFO believers accused
the government of a cover-up and mocked the military explanation of the events.
The 1990s also saw an increase in the activities of
the Citizens Against UFO Secrecy (CAUS), a group
that was formed in the 1980s by Executive Director
Peter A. Gersten. Gersten, a former New York criminal defense attorney, has represented CAUS as the
plaintiff in two legal actions under the Freedom of
Information Act, the first a lawsuit against the
National Security Agency for 135 UFO-related documents and the second against the CIA for 57 documents. On their website CAUS states that the earth
is in contact with a “non-human form of intelligence”
and that the judicial process is the only effective way
to establish governmental knowledge of this fact.
CAUS has attempted to retrieve documents on the
subject of “flying triangles” from the Department of
Defense, which insists that no such documents exist.
After the dissolution of citizen research groups such
as APRO and NICAP, the remaining citizen group
that investigates UFO and alien reports and to some
degree discusses conspiracy theories is the Mutual
UFO Network (MUFON). Formerly the Midwest
UFO Network, MUFON’s membership has been
declining in recent years as the Internet and talkradio shows such as those of Jeff Rense and Art Bell
have become the forum for discussions of alien activity and governmental cover-ups.
A return to scientific inquiry into UFO activity
occurred in the fall of 1997 when Dr. Peter Sturrock, a plasma physicist and former director of the

The Unabomber

Center for Space Science and Astrophysics at Stanford University, organized a panel of scientists to
study the physical evidence of UFOs. The committee included a number of well-known scientists who
met over a four-day period to hear reports from
eight respected UFO investigators. The panel concluded that the UFO problem is complex and probably will not yield a simple answer, that scientists
can learn from unexplained observations and
should concentrate on cases that include strong
physical evidence and reputable witness testimony,
and that there should be regular contact between
scientists and the UFO community with institutional support for research into the UFO phenomenon. The report received much media attention.
At the present time only pornographic websites are
more visited than UFO/abduction sites on the
Internet, and radio, television, and films focusing
on the subject attest to the enduring public interest
in UFOs and the conspiracy theories that have
always surrounded this phenomenon.
Angela Hague
See also: Area 51; Bell, Art; Cattle Mutilations; MJ12; Roswell; The X-Files.
References
Clark, Jerome. 1998. The UFO Book. Detroit, MI:
Visible Ink Press.
Jacobs, David M. 1975. The UFO Controversy in
America. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
———. 2000. UFOs and Abductions: Challenging
the Borders of Knowledge. Lawrence: University
Press of Kansas.
Peebles, Curtis. 1995. Watch the Skies! A Chronicle
of the Flying Saucer Myth. Washington, DC: The
Smithsonian Institution Press.

The Unabomber
In April 1996, following what had been the longest
criminal investigation in the history of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI), law enforcement
agents arrested Theodore John Kaczynski, who later
admitted to being the elusive Unabomber. Kaczynski’s contribution to U.S. conspiracy theory was twofold. First, his conspiracism represented a new turn
in anti-statist, anarchistic ideas. His eclectic, antitechnology beliefs were completely idiosyncratic

and drew their inspiration from the conviction that a
technophile elite in world society would soon control the global population and, in the process,
destroy human freedom.
Second, Kaczynski’s lengthy bombing campaign
sparked an intensive wave of media attention and
resulted in much heated paranoid rhetoric about the
identity of the mysterious figure. Because no group
ever took responsibility for the bombings, the U.S.
media and law-enforcement “profilers” generated
numerous theories about the perpetrator’s identity.
Some of these pointed to the bomber’s alleged antisemitic beliefs, due to the Jewish names of a few targeted victims, while other theories suggested that
the suspect was either an extreme right-wing populist or a mentally unbalanced thrill seeker. Despite
spending approximately $50 million in their nearly
twenty-year search, authorities long remained
stymied in the effort to apprehend the serial bomber
whose modus operandi involved mailing concealed
explosive devices to university professors with
research specializations in fields including genetics,
psychology, and computer science, as well as to some
corporate executives. Given the pattern of the bomb
attacks, which commenced in 1978 and resulted in
the deaths of three victims and the wounding of over
twenty others, authorities began to call the case
“Unabomb,” a reference to the university-oriented
targeting preferences of the unknown assailant.
The Unabomber’s eventual arrest took place following the September 1995 publication in the New
York Times and Washington Post of his rambling
magnum opus, a 35,000-word manifesto entitled
“Industrial Society and Its Future.” In letters to both
newspapers, the Unabomber offered to end his
attacks if his lengthy, apocalyptic statement of anarchist principles was published. Although initially
reluctant to submit to this blackmail, the newspapers were urged by FBI Director Louis Freeh and
Attorney General Janet Reno to agree to the strange
proposal in the hope that readers of the manifesto
might recognize its author. Following the full-length
printing of the essay, a major breakthrough was
made in the case. Having discerned similarities
between the writing in the Unabomber’s manifesto
and the letters of an eccentric family member, David
705

The Unabomber

Kaczynski alerted FBI officials about the connection
he perceived to his brother, Theodore Kaczynski.
The origins of the Unabomber’s route to violence
were unusual. Born in 1942, Theodore Kaczynski
grew up in a middle-class home in the suburbs of
Chicago. He excelled at school and, at age sixteen,
entered Harvard on a scholarship to study mathematics. From 1962 to 1967, Kaczynski was enrolled
at the University of Michigan, where he pursued a
Ph.D. in mathematics and ultimately was awarded
the annual Sumner Meyers Prize for the best doctoral dissertation in the field. In 1967, the shy and
introverted Kaczynski was hired as an assistant professor of mathematics at the University of California
at Berkeley. Within two years, however, he resigned
his position and, following a brief period of travel in
the American West and Canada, purchased a tiny
piece of property in the mountains near the hamlet
of Lincoln, Montana. At this remote site Kaczynski
constructed a small cabin and spent the next twentyfive years living the life of a mountain recluse.
The Unabomber’s Conspiratorial
Belief System
During his long stay in the rugged mountains of
western Montana, Kaczynski shaped the highly idiosyncratic, extremist philosophy that led him to adopt
a violent strategy. A lifelong lover of nature,
Kaczynski harbored deep concerns about the rapid
growth of a vast industrial and technological “system” which he felt was leading to great social disruption and the extinction of the natural world. In
his view, modern technology and those who advanced it threatened an older and more pristine way
of life, one that involved living simply and in interdependence with nature. He saw the earlynineteenth-century Industrial Revolution, in particular, as the marking point from which human society
began to degenerate on a “supertechnological” path
that left people powerlessly dependent on the
“progress” made by modern science. The institutions of science and technology not only had disastrous consequences for the environment, but,
according to Kaczynski, also stripped people of their
individualism and autonomy as they became pawns
in a modern system of global technology dominated
706

by governments, corporations, and other large
organizations.
In his manifesto, Kaczynski laid out with great
precision the conspiratorial plot he saw being
employed by an elite, global class of technocrats, scientists, and “leftists” bent on subjugating human
society to the power of the industrial-technological
system. Believing that the growing infiltration of
supertechnology into everyday existence would further erode at human independence, Kaczynski
argued that the ruling “technocracy” was creating a
slave race with an ever-diminishing connection to
the ideal, primitivist life he advocated. While his
politics have been a matter of some debate, Kaczynski makes clear in his manifesto his hatred of “leftist
collectivists,” whom he considered (along with the
technological elite) to be playing an active role in the
degradation of human freedom. As he pointed out in
his treatise, the political Left benefited from the
technological collectivization of humankind insofar
as this trend made it impossible for dissident groups
and individuals to control the circumstances of their
own lives. Kaczynski believed that the “collectivist
philosophy” of the Left, while superficially appealing to many, actually masked a darker impulse to
control human behavior.
Although he spoke for no one other than himself
in his manifesto, Kaczynski attempted to convey
that a small group of revolutionaries (named “FC”
to suggest the existence of a multi-person “Freedom Club”) opposed the industrial system and was
engaged in planning its destruction. His idealized
plan involved having this revolutionary cadre work
to weaken the economic and technological foundations of modern society to such a degree that a popular revolution against it would be possible. In addition, he maintained that a “counter-ideology” to
that of modern technology had to be developed and
propagated in order to replace the current system
in the postapocalyptic period when “Wild Nature”
again returned to guide the course of humankind.
From the tenor of the manifesto, Kaczynski clearly
believed that the industrial system was already
unstable and heading for collapse. However, he
believed that its ultimate destruction would take
much time and require the assistance of a deter-

The United Nations

mined minority of revolutionaries absolutely
devoted to the task. His package bombs, sent to
those perceived to be associated with the scientific,
organizational, and technological aspects of the system, appear to have been an effort at expediting the
revolution by fomenting chaos in the time before
the death of the current civilization.
In fall 1997, in Sacramento, California, Kaczynski
faced trial in federal court on numerous counts of
illegally manufacturing and using bombs, as well as
three counts of murder. After receiving the reports
of psychiatrists, Kaczynski’s lawyers devised a
defense that portrayed their client as insane. However, Kaczynski refused to cooperate with the legal
strategy and, instead, pleaded guilty to the charges
in exchange for the prosecution’s word that the
death penalty would not be sought. Kaczynski is
currently incarcerated at the “Supermax” prison in
Florence, Colorado, where he is serving four life
terms without possibility of parole.
Brad Whitsel
See also: Corporations; Militias.
References
Graysmith, Robert. 1997. Unabomber: A Desire to
Kill. Washington, DC: Regnery.
Lamy, Philip. 1997. “Secularizing the Millennium.”
Pp. 105–108 in Millennium, Messiahs, and
Mayhem, ed. Thomas Robbins and Susan J.
Palmer. New York: Routledge.
Taylor, Bron. 1998. “Religion, Violence, and Radical
Environmentalism.” Terrorism and Political
Violence 10 (4): 28–32.
The Unabomber Manifesto: Industrial Society and
Its Future. 1995. Berkeley, CA: Jolly Roger Press.

The United Nations
The United Nations (UN) has become a central target of contemporary right-wing conspiracy theories.
It was established on 24 October 1945 to replace the
League of Nations, which had collapsed following its
failure to prevent World War II. According to its
charter, the UN has four main purposes: to maintain
international peace and security; to develop friendly
relations among nations; to cooperate in solving
international problems and in promoting respect for
human rights; and to be a center for harmonizing

the actions of nations. The six main institutions of
the UN are the General Assembly, the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council, the
Trusteeship Council, the Secretariat, and the International Court of Justice (ICJ). All of these with the
exception of the ICJ are based at UN headquarters
in New York. The ICJ is located at The Hague in the
Netherlands. Organizations such as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the
World Health Organization are linked to the UN
through cooperative agreements. Together with the
United Nations, these organizations make up what is
known as the UN system. One hundred and eightynine countries are currently members of the UN.
The UN does not consider itself to be a “world government.” It does not make laws, and each member
state remains a sovereign country. The United
Nations has, however, been the subject of conspiracy theories almost since it was first created.
As early as 1951 the antisemitic newspaper Common Sense expressed concerns about U.S. troops who
had issued proclamations in the name of the UN during training exercises in California. The Republican
Senator Joseph R. McCarthy investigated the existence of communist plots within the UN during the
1950s, and the far-right John Birch Society, formed
by retired candy manufacturer Robert H. Welch in
1958, also saw the UN as part of a Communist conspiracy against the United States. The John Birch
Society believed that plans were afoot through the
UN for “the establishment of a one-world Communist tyranny over the population of the whole earth.”
U.S. armed forces would be turned over to the command of the UN, it was argued, and UN troops were
actively preparing to take over the country. As a consequence Birchites campaigned vigorously, as they
continue to do, to “get the United States out of the
United Nations, and the United Nations out of the
United States.” The Minutemen, a paramilitary organization formed in 1960 by Robert DePugh, further contended that beginning in 1952 U.S. troops
acting under UN command had been making “practice seizures” of U.S. cities as part of a communist
plot to confiscate the firearms of U.S. citizens.
Although concerns about the UN’s role in the creation of a global government have been a staple of
707

The United Nations

far-right politics in the United States since the
1950s, they were given renewed emphasis by members of the Patriot and militia movements during the
1990s. Publications such as The Patriot Report,
Spotlight, The Free American, Wake-Up Call America, and The Resister, and groups including the Militia of Montana, the Michigan Militia, and Police
Against the New World Order all routinely denounced the UN for its conspiratorial intent. Thousands of foreign troops were said to be training in
the United States in preparation for a UN takeover
of the country. Russian and German tanks had been
spotted throughout the nation, as had numerous
unmarked “black helicopters” operating under UN
command. Yellowstone National Park and other
national parks were believed to be under UN control, and secret plans were thought to exist for the
mass disarmament of America’s gun owners. Reflective stickers, it was warned, had been added to the
backs of road signs to direct UN forces during the
takeover and concentration camps had been constructed to house U.S. dissidents. Many Patriots
believed that in response to some kind of national
emergency, either real or deliberately manufactured, the president would declare martial law and
that this would be the signal for the UN occupation
of the United States to begin. Some even took the
view that the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing was the
beginning of such a strategy.
Members of the Christian Right have also connected the UN to a conspiracy against the interests
of the United States. One of the best examples of
this is provided by Pat Robertson, founder of the
Christian Coalition, who published a book called
The New World Order in 1991. Tracing the conspiracy back to the Bavarian Illuminati in the late eighteenth century, Robertson argued that sinister
forces had been at work throughout America’s history to make it part of a “new world order.” The
League of Nations had been formed to assist with
plans to bring about a one-world government, a oneworld army, and a one-world economy, he claimed,
and when this failed the United Nations was established to replace it. For Robertson, this “new world
order” was close to coming to fruition. Having noted

708

that the UN’s authorization of military action against
Iraq during the Gulf War in 1991 was the first time
that the world’s nations had come together since the
Tower of Babel had been built, he suggested that
President George Bush was “unwittingly carrying
out the mission . . . of a tightly knit cabal whose goal
is nothing less than a new order for the human race
under the domination of Lucifer and his followers.”
D. J. Mulloy
See also: Antisemitism; John Birch Society;
McCarthy, Joseph; Militias; New World Order;
Robertson, Pat.
References
Durham, Martin. 2000. The Christian Right, the Far
Right and the Boundaries of American
Conservatism. Manchester: Manchester
University Press.
Hudson Highland Militia. n.d. “12 Reasons to Get
Us out of the United Nations.” http://www.
geocities.com/totalresistance/12reasons.html.
Jefferson, M. W. 1994. America under Siege.
Knoxville, TN: Freedom and Liberty
Foundation.
John Birch Society. 1995. “Beliefs and Principles of
the John Birch Society.” Pp. 105–110 in
Extremism in America: A Reader, ed. Lyman
Tower Sargent. New York: New York University
Press.
Kentucky Riflemen Militia. 1995. “Will Americans
Allow the Imposition of a National Police State as
Part of the U.N. New World Order?” Kentucky
Riflemen News 1 (1): 1–2.
Militia of Montana. 1994. Enemies: Domestic and
Foreign. Noxon, MT: MOM.
Mulloy, D. J., ed. 1999. Homegrown Revolutionaries:
An American Militia Reader. Norwich, England:
Arthur Miller Centre for American Studies.
The Present Truth Ministry. 1994. “Are National
Park ‘Biospheres’ under UN Control?” The
Patriot Report. December: 3.
Robertson, Pat. 1991. The New World Order. Dallas,
TX: Word Incorporated.
Stern, Kenneth S. 1997. A Force upon the Plain: The
American Militia Movement and the Politics of
Hate. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Welch, Robert H. W. 1961. The Blue Book of the
John Birch Society. Belmont, MA: American
Opinion.
Website
United Nations: http://www.un.org.

USS Maine

Universal Price Codes
A widely circulated contemporary conspiracy theory
holds that the Universal Price Code (UPC) has the
number “666” hidden in it (the symbol 666 is the
“mark of the beast” according to the New Testament
Book of Revelation). The Universal Price Code,
sometimes called a “barcode,” was introduced in
1973 to speed up and eliminate human cashier
errors in U.S. supermarkets. According to the conspiracy theory, the 666 code appears as the three
longer “guard bars,” to the left, center, and right of a
UPC barcode.
Since their introduction, UPC barcodes have been
placed on many items. A fear has spread that one day
barcodes will be placed on humans, allowing the government to keep track of a person’s movements. The
basic root of this fear lies in a passage from Revelation, the final book of the Bible:
And he causeth all, both small and great, rich and
poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right
hand, or in their foreheads: And that no man might
buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name
of the beast, or the number of his name. Here is
wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the
number of the beast: for it is the number of a man;
and his number is six hundred threescore and six.
(Revelation 13:16–18)

The theory suggests that every person will be
marked with a barcode in which the 666 is hidden.
The barcode will be used to buy and sell things and
engage in every form of commerce. Particularly
frightening to those who believe in this conspiracy
theory is the trend toward a cashless society, one in
which credit cards using barcodes embedded in
magnetic strips are used for all financial transactions.
The growth in the use of smart cards, which resemble credit cards but have tiny computer chips on
them, also raises the concern of those who take the
Revelation passage literally. Smart cards have the
possibility of storing private information including
medical records and financial information. The technology has not been widely accepted in the United
States, but is quite common in Japan and Europe.

Conspiracy theorists claim that not long after the
introduction of smart cards, security concerns will
cause the computer chip to be placed on the body to
prevent theft of this information. This will be the
mark of the beast as predicted in Revelation.
John David Rausch, Jr.
See also: Apocalypticism; Identification Cards.
References
Harris, Robert. 1999. “No Hidden Sixes in the UPC
Barcode.” http://www.virtualsalt.com/barcode.
htm.
Relfe, Mary Stewart. 1982. The New Money System
666. Montgomery, AL: Ministries, Inc.
Watkins, Terry. 1999. “What about Barcodes and
666: The Mark of the Beast?” http://www.av1611.
org/666/barcode.html.

USS Maine
At 9:40 P.M. on 15 February 1898, the USS Maine,
moored in Havana Harbor, Cuba, exploded, killing
266 men. The destruction took place in an already
tense situation between Spain, which had imperial
control over Cuba, and the United States, where
sympathy for Cuban independence was strong. The
cause of the explosion was not immediately apparent, and in the United States speculation that it was
perpetrated by the Spanish was rife, a theory that
was actively promoted by the sensationalist press.
Although war between Spain and the United States
was probably inevitable, the sinking of the Maine
and the theory that Spain had caused it led to an
overwhelming public sentiment in favor of war and
the avenging of the Maine. The Spanish-American
War began on 24 April 1898, after Congress recognized Cuban independence on 20 April. The slogan
“Remember the Maine!” was to be a popular one in
rallying U.S. support for the war.
The United States had taken an interest in Cuba
since the middle of the nineteenth century when
Cuban nationalists began to fight for independence.
Motivations for this interest were numerous: sympathy for the goal of independence and freedom
from a corrupt Old World power (a long cherished
American ideal); humanitarian interest in the state

709

USS Maine

The battleship USS Maine entered Havana Harbor on January 25, 1898, to protect and possibly evacuate U.S. citizens if
riots over Spanish independence led to violence. On February 15, an explosion sank the ship and killed 266 of its 370
crewmen. Although the cause was never determined, many Americans believed Spain was responsible. Despite Spanish
efforts to offer more autonomy to Cuba as a conciliatory gesture, war became inevitable, with a battle cry of “Remember
the Maine, to Hell with Spain!” sweeping the nation. (National Technical Information Service)

of the Cuban people; and economic interests in
trade with, and assets in, Cuba. The U.S. people
supported the Cubans’ struggle and provided them
with money, guns, and supplies. The Cleveland
administration was reluctant to intervene, but when
William McKinley assumed the presidency in 1897,
the push for intervention became stronger.
Diplomatic events in 1898 revealed Spain’s unwillingness to negotiate with the United States over the
Cuban situation. It was also unclear just what the
U.S. demanded from Spain—many in the administration were unsure whether Cubans were capable of
governing themselves. A letter from the Spanish
ambassador, Dupuy de Lôme, was published in the
William Randolph Hearst newspaper the New York
Journal on 9 February. In the letter de Lôme
insulted President McKinley, outraging the American public. Only six days later, news came that the
Maine, which had been sent to Havana in January as
an ostensibly friendly gesture, had been sunk.
The Maine had been commissioned as a battleship (although it was originally classified as an
710

armored cruiser) on 17 September 1895. Her captain in 1898 was Charles D. Sigsbee, who sent the
note to Washington informing them of the disaster.
In part it read: “Maine blown up in Havana Harbor
and destroyed. Many wounded and doubtless more
killed and drowned. . . . Public opinion should be
suspended until further report” (March, 316).
Despite Sigsbee’s plea against jumping to conclusions and the refusal of the U.S. government to
speculate on the cause of the explosion, public opinion began to make its own judgment, inflamed by
the “yellow press” of Hearst and his rival, Joseph
Pulitzer. Pulitzer’s New York World of 17 February
1898 ran the headline, “Maine Explosion Caused by
Bomb or Torpedo?” with a graphic illustration of the
Maine exploding (complete with bodies being
thrown from the ship) beneath. Articles quoted
“experts” speculating that “a torpedo was used,” and
the wounded survivors of the Maine expressed their
opinion that it was “a deep laid plot of Spaniards.”
Three days later, Sigsbee himself was quoted as
believing “a submarine mine blew up the Maine”

USS Maine

(New York World, 20 February 1898). By 24 February, not even ten days after the explosion, headlines
ran in the World that left no doubt that the papers
believed that it had been no accident: “Experts at
Havana Say Some Great Exterior Force Rent and
Sunk the Ship” and “Fifty Physical Proofs that
Maine Was Blown Up by a Mine or Torpedo.”
The speculation in the press in the first days after
the explosion was based on little actual evidence, but
fed into the growing public clamor for action against
the Spanish. The government continued to refuse to
comment, instead waiting for the results of the official investigation that had been launched immediately after the disaster. Divers and armor experts
were sent to investigate the physical evidence of the
wreck, and a Naval Court of Inquiry was held. The
public believed that it would provide concrete evidence of Spanish guilt. At the same time, the Spanish conducted their own investigation (as the Maine
had blown up in their territorial waters) and concluded that it was caused by an internal explosion.
On 28 March, the official report was submitted. It
concluded that two explosions had occurred: “In the
opinion of the Court, the Maine was destroyed by the
explosion of a submarine mine, which caused the
partial explosion of two or more of her forward magazines. The Court has been unable to obtain evidence, fixing the responsibility for the destruction of
the Maine upon any person or persons” (March,
327). While it was clear that Spain had most to lose
in going to war, the public was more than willing to
attribute the guilt for this to them. The neutral findings of the court opened the way to this. The press
jumped at the chance to inflame the issue. Hearst’s
slogan was “Remember the Maine, and to hell with
Spain!” On 22 April, the United States blockaded
Cuba, and a day later volunteers were called for. The
theory that the Spanish had sunk the Maine clearly
contributed to a strong public opinion encouraged by
the press favoring war. While it was not the only factor present in a complicated diplomatic situation, it
was a significant one. The Maine remained a patriotic
symbol around which support for the war cohered.
What, then, was the “true” story? Admiral H. G.
Rickover conducted a new examination into the
explosion in 1976. He noted the problems of the orig-

inal 1898 U.S. inquiry: limited expertise, poor diving
conditions in the harbor, and inadequate questioning
during the hearings all contributed to an inquiry that
was not as comprehensive as it should have been,
given the import of its result. Even contemporary
experts questioned the likelihood of a mine having
been the cause of the disaster. Public pressure to do
something with the Maine wreck led to Congress
appropriating $650,000 in 1910 to remove the wreck
and recover the bodies still there for burial in Arlington Cemetery. The Army Corps of Engineers were
given primary responsibility for the endeavor. In
1911, a new board of investigation arrived in Havana
with more expertise than 1898. They took detailed
records of the damage and many photographs and
diagrams. Nevertheless, their ultimate conclusion
(while differing from 1898 in technical detail) was
that the primary explosion was still due to the placing
of a mine, which had set off another explosion in the
magazines. For the purposes of Rickover’s study, two
experts reexamined all the evidence and concluded
that in fact the primary explosion had been an internal one, possibly caused by fire in a bunker setting off
explosions in the magazines.
The story of the sinking of the USS Maine is clearly
central to the story of the Spanish-American War; but
it also raises issues that have to do with the role of the
press in creating “conspiracy theories” to suit their
purposes (increased circulation and jingoism), as well
as the issue of scientific evidence and its role in establishing “truth.” In this story, technical evidence is
central in determining the “true” story of the Maine
and whether a war was started over an accident. Certainly the role of technical or scientific evidence continues to be central to society’s need to determine the
“truth” of events, but this story also reveals that technical evidence (which is not infallible) can be given
too much power. Rickover speculates whether a different outcome might have occurred if the 1898
inquiry had come to a different conclusion. While
that can only ever be hypothesis, it nevertheless raises
the issue of just how important the “conspiracy theory” about the Maine—reinforced by the “truth” of a
scientific inquiry and the inflammatory actions of the
press—was in shaping the course of history.
Amanda Laugesen

711

USS Maine

See also: Hearst, William Randolph; Yellow
Journalism.
References
Bouvier, Virginia M. 2001. “Imaging a Nation: U.S.
Political Cartoons and the War of 1898.” In
Whose America? The War of 1898 and the Battles
to Define the Nation, ed. Virginia M. Bouvier.
Westport, CT: Praeger.
Dyal, Donald H., ed. 1996. Historical Dictionary of
the Spanish American War. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press.

712

March, Alden. [1899] 1970. The History and
Conquest of the Philippines and Our Other Island
Possessions. New York: Arno Press.
Morgan, H. Wayne. 1965. America’s Road to
Empire: The War with Spain and Overseas
Expansion. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
New York World. February–March 1898.
Rickover, H. G. 1976. How the Battleship Maine
Was Destroyed. Washington, DC: Department of
the Navy.

V
Venona
In 1995 the National Security Agency (NSA)
released details of the Venona Project, a top secret
U.S. military intelligence program to decipher
Soviet cablegrams that had begun in 1943 and was
formally closed in 1980. For some historians (e.g.,
Haynes and Klehr), the information contained in
these messages about Soviet spies in the United
States offers conclusive proof that McCarthy-era
fears about Communist infiltration of the U.S. government—often dismissed as bordering on the paranoid—were quite accurate after all. Other historians, however, question the reliability of the
decryptions as a “smoking gun” because of the
incomplete and tentative nature of the deciphering,
and therefore dispute the conclusion that the red
scare of the 1940s and 1950s was justified.
Hearing rumors of a secret German–Soviet peace
deal, in February 1943 Colonel Carter Clarke of the
U.S. Army’s Special Branch instructed the Signal
Intelligence Service (forerunner of the NSA) to
attempt to decode Soviet diplomatic cable traffic to
and from its embassies and consulates passing
through the United States. The two-stage cipher system used by the Soviet Union was in theory
unbreakable, but, by a mixture of skill, perseverance, and luck (the accidental duplication by the
Soviet manufacturer of the “one-time pads” used in
the encipherment produced a recurrent flaw), the
army code-breakers managed to render the first of
2,900 intercepted messages sent between 1940 and
1948 partially readable by 1946—by which time the

war was over. However, the messages turned out to
reveal not secret peace-deal negotiations but evidence that the Soviet Union had been organizing an
espionage campaign against the United States since
1942. The deciphered cables indicated that the
Soviet Union had recruited informants in most U.S.
government and military agencies at all levels, and
they mentioned several hundred U.S. citizens or resident aliens (almost always by code name) who were
involved with the Soviet Union in some capacity
(Haynes and Klehr put the figure at 349).
The task of deciphering the original messages continued slowly, on and off, until 1980. During the
McCarthy years, the FBI and CIA used the Venona
decryptions to identify new spies, to corroborate
existing information gained from prominent Communist defectors like Elizabeth Bentley and Whittaker Chambers, and to confirm the guilt of atomic
spies such as Klaus Fuchs and Julius Rosenberg. It is
arguable, however, that the method of deciphering
the messages meant that their revelations were
potentially circular: the cryptographers sometimes
used as a working hypothesis an identification of the
real person behind the code name that had been fed
to them by other intelligence agencies, which then in
turn used the partially decrypted messages as confirmation of their suspicions about a particular individual. In many cases, the association of a code name
with a particular individual remains speculative or
unknown. Nevertheless, in combination with the
partial opening up of the Soviet archives after 1991,
the Venona cables offer the possibility of significant
713

Vesey, Denmark

new interpretations of the emergence of the cold
war, placing it much earlier than commonly thought.
The project remained secret until 1995, as U.S.
intelligence agencies insisted that it was more
important not to reveal how successful it had been
in cracking Soviet codes. There was also a recognition that the cables would be ruled as hearsay and
hence inadmissible as evidence in a court of law, so
their release would not have been of immediate use.
Some commentators (Moynihan) have argued
recently that this continuing secrecy was a mistake,
as the Venona Project would have clarified a lot of
the muddied water about Communist infiltration
during the cold war, allowing the American people
to have a clearer picture of the extent of Soviet espionage based on fact rather than rumor and paranoia.
While the Venona documents would have been
taken to confirm, for example, that Julius Rosenberg
was indeed guilty of passing on atomic secrets, they
would also have demonstrated that Dean Acheson
(secretary of state in the Truman administration)
was not the Communist conspirator that Senator
Joseph McCarthy accused him of being.
Peter Knight
See also: Anticommunism; Atomic Secrets;
Chambers, Whittaker; Cold War; House UnAmerican Activities Committee; McCarthy, Joseph.
References
Haynes, John Earl, and Harvey Klehr. 1999. Venona:
Decoding Soviet Espionage in America. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Moynihan, Daniel Patrick. 1998. Secrecy: The
American Experience. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Website
National Security Agency: http://www.nsa.gov/docs/
venona.

Vesey, Denmark
Denmark Vesey was a free black carpenter who led a
conspiracy of about 9,000 slaves in Charleston, South
Carolina, in the summer of 1822. The goal of this
conspiracy was to seize the federal arsenal, set fire to
the city, slaughter as many of the white inhabitants as
possible, and then seize ships and flee to Haiti.

714

Vesey had been a slave, but had purchased his
freedom after he won $1,500 in a lottery in
Charleston in 1800. He was intelligent, fluent in several languages, and possessed leadership skills that
he demonstrated in the planning of his conspiracy.
He informed only a small number of trusted lieutenants, usually skilled slaves and members of the
African Church, of the details of the plot, keeping the
rank and file ignorant of such information. He
recruited few domestic slaves because he feared they
would betray the plot to their masters. His main
coconspirators were “Gullah Jack” Pritchard, Ned
and Rolla Bennett, Monday Gell, Bacchus Hammett,
Mingo Harth, and Peter Poyas. Ned and Rolla Bennett were slaves of the South Carolina governor,
Thomas Bennett, who lived three blocks from Denmark Vesey. Gell was a harness maker, and Poyas was
a shipwright. “Gullah Jack” was an Angolan priest
and carpenter as well as an effective recruiter of
slaves for the conspiracy. Gell, Harth, and Poyas also
played integral roles in spreading word about the
uprising and recruiting slaves for the cause. Vesey
instructed his lieutenants to keep separate lists of volunteers so that if one of them was arrested, that conspirator would be unable to provide the names of the
other volunteers to the white authorities. In the wake
of an arrest, the other conspirators would then be
able to destroy their lists and protect themselves and
their volunteers. Vesey maintained a tight-knit conspiracy through this control of information and
threats of reprisals against those who informed white
authorities of the plot.
The attack on Charleston was to occur on 14 July,
the anniversary of the fall of the Bastille in the opening days of the French Revolution. It was also a time
when many of Charleston’s white citizens would be
out of town, escaping the summer heat, and thus
reducing the strength of the militia the conspirators
would have to face. That date happened to fall on a
Sunday, which was a day when many slaves came to
the city to visit the markets. A large number of black
slaves would thus not raise apprehensions among the
city’s whites. The attack was to begin at midnight.
Rolla Bennett was to murder the governor and
mayor, while house servants were to murder their

Vesey, Denmark

masters. “Gullah Jack” was to lead a company of
Angolan slaves, Poyas was to seize the arsenal and its
weapons, and slaves from the countryside were to
enter Charleston. For those slaves who entered
Charleston that night, Vesey made arrangements to
procure some weapons, such as swords and pikes, for
their use. For the conspirators who had to overwhelm white defenders near key installations such as
the arsenal, Vesey contracted with a white barber to
provide these men with white wigs and whiskers as
disguises.
The Conspiracy Unravels
The conspiracy came undone on 22 May, when
William Paul, one of Vesey’s recruiters, tried to convince Peter Prioleau, the mulatto cook for Colonel
John Prioleau, to join the plot. Peter rebuffed Paul
and then informed his friend, William Penceel,
another mulatto, of the plot. On 30 May, Peter told
his master of the plot and of Paul’s attempt to get
him to join. Prioleau told the mayor, James Hamilton, of the plot, and the mayor then convened the
city council. Paul had already been arrested and
gave the authorities the names of Harth and Poyas.
Both men were arrested but laughed off the suggestions of a plot. Paul implicated Ned Bennett,
who personally went to the mayor to defend himself
from the charges. Bennett then told Vesey of the
developments and Vesey decided to move the date
of the uprising to 16 June. Thus far, the white
authorities remained unsure if a conspiracy actually
existed. That uncertainty soon evaporated.
On 9 June, Rolla Bennett told George Wilson, a
mulatto blacksmith and a fellow parishioner of the
African Church, of the plot and asked him to join.
Wilson refused to join and told his master, Major

John Wilson, of the plot on 14 June. Wilson told
Hamilton, who now felt his suspicions were confirmed because two slaves had implicated the same
conspirators, slaves who belonged to the governor.
Governor Bennett ordered the arrest of almost a
dozen slaves, including Harth, Poyas, and Rolla and
Ned Bennett. The Charleston authorities instructed
the militia to patrol the city and asked for, and
received, additional military support from the federal
government. The planned uprising on 16 June never
occurred because Vesey’s remaining coconspirators
could not leave the city and coordinate their efforts
with slaves in the countryside. The heightened state
of alert of the local militia, and the military resources
of the federal government, doomed the chances for
the conspiracy. Charleston authorities arrested the
remaining fugitives, Vesey on 22 June, Gell on 27
June, and Pritchard on 5 July. Trials of the accused
began in the Workhouse, where the prisoners were
held, and a committee of local leading white men
oversaw the judicial process. In all, 101 men were
put on trial and 35 were hanged, including Vesey,
Poyas, Ned and Rolla Bennett, Harth, and Pritchard.
James C. Foley
See also: Slave Revolts; Turner, Nat.
References
Egerton, Douglas R. 1999. He Shall Go Out Free:
The Lives of Denmark Vesey. Madison, WI:
Madison House.
Pearson, Edward A., ed. 1999. Designs Against
Charleston: The Trial Record of the Denmark
Vesey Slave Conspiracy of 1822. Chapel Hill, NC:
University of North Carolina Press.
Robertson, David. 1999. Denmark Vesey: The
Buried History of America’s Largest Slave
Rebellion and the Man Who Led It. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf.

715

W
Waco
Events at Waco, Texas, in 1993 have been the subject of numerous conspiracy theories. Many simply
involve allegations of government misconduct and
subsequent cover-up, but others, particularly those
from within the American Patriot movement, suggest a more extensive conspiracy on the part of the
U.S. government to make the United States part of
a global “New World Order.”
First, the events themselves: On 28 February
1993 the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms
(BATF) attempted to serve a search and arrest warrant on David Koresh, the leader of a religious sect
called the Branch Davidians that was based at
Mount Carmel, near Waco. The sect, an offshoot of
the Seventh Day Adventist Church, had first moved
to Mount Carmel in 1935, and about 130 Davidians
lived on the site in 1993. The BATF suspected that
Koresh and his followers were involved in the manufacture and sale of illegal weapons and explosives.
There were also concerns that children were being
abused at the site and that it contained a drugmaking laboratory. The secrecy of the planned
operation had not been maintained, however, and
when the BATF agents entered Mount Carmel,
accompanied by three Texas National Guard helicopters, a gun battle erupted. It is disputed whether
the Davidians or the federal agents fired first, but
four BATF agents were killed and twenty more
were wounded during the shooting. Five Davidians
were also killed—two by the BATF and three by
fellow Davidians—and five others were wounded.

Following the failure of the initial raid, the FBI
was called in to take control of events. A standoff
lasting fifty-one days then ensued, as over 700 officers from various government and law enforcement
agencies surrounded the Davidians’ property. During this time, unsuccessful negotiations took place to
persuade the Branch Davidians to surrender peacefully. The standoff was brought to an end on 19 April
1993 when armored tanks, modified for demolition
duty with battering rams, began punching holes in
the walls of the Davidian complex to inject CS gas,
in the hope of “flushing out” the Davidians. Over
300 canisters of tear gas were pumped into the complex for over four hours. Finally, a fire broke out in
which at least seventy-four men, women, and children were killed. The whole operation was broadcast
live on U.S. television. In the immediate aftermath
of the fire, there was much speculation as to whether
it had been caused by the CS gas, or whether it had
been started deliberately by the Davidians themselves, perhaps as part of a suicide pact. More conspiratorial explanations also abounded, but a report
by Special Counsel John C. Danforth has concluded
that it was the Davidians who burnt down the Mount
Carmel complex.
In addition to Danforth’s report, there were several other investigations and inquiries into the events
at Waco, including a fire investigation, congressional
hearings in 1993 and 1995, a 1993 Department of
Treasury report about the BATF’s role in the affair,
and a 1999 General Accounting Office report on the
use of armed forces. In 1994 eleven survivors from
717

Waco

the fire stood trial in San Antonio for conspiracy to
murder federal agents and other lesser offenses. Five
were convicted of voluntary manslaughter, two were
convicted of weapons charges, and four were acquitted of all charges.
Waco, along with the siege at Ruby Ridge in
Idaho in 1992 and the passage of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act in 1993, was a crucial
factor in the creation and subsequent growth of the
U.S. militia movement. Two of the most important
militias, the Michigan Militia and the Militia of
Montana, both of which were formed in early 1994,
claimed that the “attack” on the Branch Davidians
served as a “wake-up call” for them. They saw it as
evidence of a conspiracy within the U.S. government to attack and disarm its own citizens, arguing
that Waco was only the beginning of the attempt by
“global elitists” to impose a “New World Order” or
“one-world government” on the United States.
Two videos produced by Linda Thompson’s
American Justice Federation were instrumental in
spreading these kinds of conspiracy theories
throughout the United States, influencing both the
militia movement and groups within the wider
Patriot movement. Waco: The Big Lie and Waco II:
The Big Lie Continues contended that the FBI had
deliberately started the fire that destroyed Mount
Carmel; that federal agents had killed children during the “siege”; that “black helicopters” had fired on
the Davidians; and that the federal government had
conspired to lie and cover up what had really happened. The Internet-based Waco Holocaust Electronic Museum (WHEM) also believes that the
Branch Davidians were deliberately killed by the
U.S. government. It argues that the whole operation was a “test” for a future “military/police occupation of civilian society” under a National Response Plan, and that the fire at the complex was
started by the Special Operations Command of the
U.S. military to cover its murders of the Branch
Davidians (WHEM 2001b). According to WHEM,
many of the Davidians were already dead before
the 19 April “tank attack and fire.” Their bodies, it
says, were “selectively beheaded, mutilated and
incinerated (‘laundered’) to disguise the time,
cause, and circumstances of death.” The tank attack
718

and fire were “diversions to hide the truth and
destroy the death scene” (WHEM 2001a).
The Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh
was convinced that the government was covering up
its atrocities at Waco. He visited the site during the
fifty-one-day standoff, watched and was influenced
by Thompson’s video Waco: The Big Lie, and sold
videos and pamphlets with titles such as “U.S. Government Initiates Open Warfare Against American
People” at gun shows. The bombing of the Alfred P.
Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City took
place on the second anniversary of Waco on 19 April
1995. It was intended as a warning to the United
States that the nation was in danger of becoming a
police state, and McVeigh hoped that it would prevent any further “Wacos” in the future. The blast
killed 168 people, and injured over 500. Fresh concerns about what happened at Waco arose in August
1999, when, after six years of denials by government
and law enforcement officials, the founder of the
FBI’s Hostage Rescue Team, Danny O. Coulson,
admitted that the FBI had used pyrotechnic devices
during the 19 April raid on Mount Carmel. A Time
magazine poll on 26 August 1999 indicated that 61
percent of the American people believed that federal law enforcement officials had started the fire at
the Branch Davidian complex. On 9 September
Attorney General Janet Reno appointed former U.S.
senator John C. Danforth as special counsel to investigate the events at Waco. Danforth investigated
allegations that federal agents had caused the fire
that destroyed the Davidian complex; that they had
pinned children in the burning building with gunfire; that they had illegally employed the armed
forces of the United States; and that they had lied
and covered up their alleged misconduct.
The investigation lasted fourteen months, employed seventy-four personnel and cost approximately $17 million. One thousand and one witnesses
were interviewed and over 2.3 million pages of documents were reviewed. Danforth’s final report, published in November 2000, concluded that government agents did not start or spread the fire at Waco;
that they did not direct gunfire at the Branch Davidian complex; that they did not improperly use the
armed forces of the United States; and that they did

Walker, William

not engage in a massive conspiracy and cover-up.
Responsibility for the tragedy at Waco rested, the
report said, with certain of the Branch Davidians
and their leader, David Koresh, who had shot and
killed four BATF agents and wounded twenty others, shot at FBI agents trying to insert tear gas into
the complex, burned down the complex themselves,
and shot some of their own people, including at least
five children. Danforth was critical of the FBI and
Department of Justice officials who had failed to disclose the use of pyrotechnic tear gas rounds until
August 1999, but overall he noted that “what is
remarkable is the overwhelming evidence exonerating the government from the charges made against
it, and the lack of any real evidence to support the
charges of bad acts” (Danforth, i).
D. J. Mulloy
See also: Militias; New World Order; Oklahoma
City Bombing; Ruby Ridge.
References
Danforth, John C. 2000. Final Report to the Deputy
Attorney General Concerning the 1993
Confrontation at the Mt. Carmel Complex, Waco,
Texas. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Herbeck, Dan, and Lou Michel. 2001. American
Terrorist: Timothy McVeigh and the Oklahoma
City Bombing. New York: Regan Books.
Mulloy, D. J., ed. 1999. Homegrown Revolutionaries:
An American Militia Reader. Norwich, England:
Arthur Miller Center for American Studies.
Reavis, Dick J. 1995. The Ashes of Waco: An
Investigation. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the
Judiciary and the Subcommittee on National
Security, International Affairs, and Criminal
Justice of the Committee on Government Reform
and Oversight. 1996. Joint Hearings on Activities
of Federal Law Enforcement Agencies toward the
Branch Davidians, 104th Cong., 1st sess., 19
July–1 August 1995. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Tarbor, James, and Eugene Gallacher. 1995. Why
Waco? Cults and the Battle for Religious Freedom
in America. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Thompson, Linda. 1993. “Waco.” Email. 21 April.
http://www.conspiracy-net.com/archives/articles/
conspiracy/terrorism/CNC1b001.

Waco Holocaust Electronic Museum:
http://www.mnsinc.com/SkyWriter/Waco
Museum/index.html.
———. 2001a. “Brief History.” http://www.mnsinc.
com/SkyWriter/WacoMuseum/ cover/c_page02.
html.
———. 2001b. “Waco: National Testbed Center.”
http://www.mnsinc.com/SkyWriter/WacoMuseum/
war/page/w_n.html.
Waco: The Rules of Engagement. 1997. Dir. William
Gazecki.
Wright, Stuart A. ed. 1995. Armageddon in Waco:
Critical Perspectives on the Branch Davidian
Conflict. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.

Walker, William
William Walker was an infamous nineteenthcentury American soldier of fortune and privateer
(a “filibuster,” in the jargon of the day), who led a
conspiracy in the 1850s and 1860s to grab land in
Mexico, Honduras, and Nicaragua in order to assist
the United States in its perceived Manifest Destiny
to dominate the Americas, and to garner glory and
riches for himself.
Born in Nashville, Tennessee, in 1824, Walker was
raised in a religious household. His parents hoped
that he would become a minister, but Walker decided instead to study first medicine and then law.
After becoming a doctor and a lawyer, and being dissatisfied with both, Walker turned his attention
toward journalism and eventually found himself in
California as one of the founding editors of the San
Francisco Herald, established in 1850. Once again
unhappy with his profession, Walker returned to law
for a short time before succumbing to the clamor for
glory and riches promoted by the idea of the United
States’ Manifest Destiny.
Enticed by the Western land grab that followed
the Mexican–American war and refused a grant to
establish a settlement by the Mexican government,
Walker named himself a colonel and attempted to
establish his own state in parts of Baja California and
Sonora. Aided by a mere forty-five men, Walker
landed in La Paz on 3 November 1853, where his
troops imprisoned Governor Rafael Espinosa, replaced the Mexican flag with their own and declared
719

Walker, William

William Walker’s men reposing in the convent of San Francisco, during entrance into Granada in 1855. (Library of
Congress)

a new republic with no allegiance to Mexico, with
Walker as its president. Walker was not the first such
person to attempt to seize a territory and declare it
a sovereign nation, nor was his sovereign state in
Mexico his last attempt at filibustering. (The term
filibuster was taken from the Portugese and Spanish
term for a pirate that held a ship for ransom, and was
later used as a term in the U.S. Senate for an action
taken in preventing a vote. In the nineteenth century, it also became a term—for some of treason, for
others of glory—applied to mercenaries or soldiers
of fortune who attempted to seize a portion of land
for their own fame, fortune, or glory.)
Walker’s foray into nation-building in Mexico
failed when supplies and troops ran low, and he surrendered to the United States government in May
1854. Revered as a hero by some in the United
720

States and reviled by many in Mexico, Walker was
tried and acquitted of violating the neutrality law
set forth in the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. After
his acquittal, Walker returned to journalism in San
Francisco for a short time, but, undaunted by his
failure in Mexico, returned to his filibustering pursuits, this time with his sights set on Nicaragua.
Taking full advanatge of the civil war between the
conservative Legitimatists and the Liberal Democrats then being waged in Nicaragua, Walker’s new
partner, Byron Cole, was awarded a colonization
grant by the president of the provisional government,
Francisco Castellon. Hoping that Cole and Walker
would aid them economically, the Democrats, led by
Castellon, welcomed their plan. But Walker had no
intention of reestablishing a Nicaraguan government.
When Castellon died Walker signed a treaty with the

Wall Street

Legitimist General Ponciano Corral, and, after the
country was reunited with Patricio Rivas as president,
Walker became Rivas’s commander-in-chief of the
army.
Not content with being mere commander-in-chief
of the army, Walker used his influence within the
Rivas cabinet to eventually oust Rivas and call for a
new election, with himself as a candidate. Never forgetting the notion of Manifest Destiny, Walker was
planning to unite all five Central American states
into a confederacy and to reintroduce slavery into
the region in order to shore up that institution’s
strength when his ultimate goal was achieved: the
annexation of Central America by the United States.
Walker succeeded in becoming president in July
1856, but his success was short lived. Recognizing
that Walker’s plans were to conquer the entire
region, the Costa Rican government, led by President Juan Rafael Mora, organized an army to stop
Walker’s band before it could invade Costa Rica.
Nicaraguan patriots, also unhappy with the thought
of becoming a part of the United States, rose up
against Walker and joined the Costa Rican army in
defeating him.
Walker surrendered to the U.S. Navy in May 1857
and was escorted back to the United States, leaving
behind 407 of his American soldiers, many sick and
wounded. Walker was once again acquitted for violating the neutrality laws. Still set on conquering
Central America and forging a union with the southern states of America, Walker spent most of 1859 and
part of 1860 writing The War in Nicaragua, the sale
of which helped to finance his final expedition in
1860. Working from Honduras, Walker made his last
attempt at conquering the region when he was captured by the British Navy and turned over to the
Honduran government.
Although Walker emerged from his American trials both victorious and lauded by many as a hero, he
was not so fortunate in his final trial in Honduras.
The Honduran government, unimpressed with
Walker’s heroism and the idea of the United States’
Manifest Destiny, sentenced him to death. Walker
was killed by a firing squad and buried in Trujillo.
Walker’s failure in Nicaragua and the Civil War at
home prompted many filibusters and potential fili-

busters to rethink their plans, and filibustering as a
heroic U.S. pursuit lost its appeal. Though quite
famous in the nineteenth century for his exploits—
Walker’s fame even inspired a musical comedy on
Broadway called “Nicaragua”—William Walker is all
but forgotten in the United States today. In
Nicaragua and Costa Rica, however, Walker’s exploits
and subsequent defeat will never be forgotten.
Michele Ren
See also: Iran-Contra; Mexican-American War.
References
Brown, Charles H. 1980. Agents of Manifest
Destiny: The Lives and Times of the Filibusters.
Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina
Press.
Houston, Robert. 1984. The Nation Thief. New
York: Pantheon Books.
Juda, Fanny. 1919. California Filibusters: A History
of their Expeditions into Hispanic America .
Extracts at http://www.sfmuseum.org/hist1/
walker.html.
Walker, William. 1985 [1860]. The War in
Nicaragua. Ed. Robert Houston. Tucson, AZ:
University of Arizona Press.

Wall Street
Viewed suspiciously by people as far apart politically as the Rev. Jesse Jackson and the Rev. Pat
Robertson, Wall Street is seen as the fulcrum of
money manipulation and shenanigans involving the
U.S. economy. The “insider trading” scandals of the
1980s added to the perception that Wall Street was
soaked in corruption, full of phoney deals, and a
front for nefarious interests of all types.
The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), the
largest securities exchange in the United States,
began in 1792 when twenty-four New York merchants and brokers agreed to charge standard commissions on their sales. Formally organized in 1817
as the New York Stock Exchange Board, the NYSE
adopted rules to govern the sales of securities.
Members paid an admission fee of $25 and had to
have a year’s experience in the brokerage business
before the entire membership could vote to allow
them to join. In its early years, the NYSE traded
thirty different securities, including federal, state,
721

Wall Street

and municipal bonds, but soon railroads and other
private corporations traded shares on the Exchange.
Financing the Civil War led to immense growth
in the NYSE, and the sales of war bonds led to
charges of corruption and “speculation.” (Defining
speculation is difficult, in that it is trading in a security for a “short-term” gain. What constitutes “short
term” to one person is a lifetime to another.) The
collapse of Jay Cooke’s investment banking house
triggered the panic of 1873, raising suspicions about
the “New York money power,” “Jewish interests”
(linked to the Rothschilds), and Wall Street. By the
end of the 1800s, some 1,300 securities were traded
on “the Street,” and in 1901 daily volume reached 3
million shares.
In reality, the sheer volume of Wall Street transactions made it nearly impossible for any consortium—let alone individual—to “control” even a single major stock, let alone the “market.” Quite the
contrary, the NYSE has been buffeted by external
events: in 1914, along with all exchanges in Europe,
Wall Street closed for more than four months after
World War I broke out, and in 2001 the terrorist
attacks on the World Trade Center shut down the
NYSE for three business days.
The strongest criticisms of Wall Street came over
its purported role in causing the Great Depression.
During the 1920s, in what was called the “Great Bull
Market,” stock prices skyrocketed, some rising several hundred percent in a few months. Americans of
almost every social strata participated in the market,
with one survey of a new bond issue showing teachers, janitors, maids, and cab drivers among the most
frequently represented occupational groups. Charles
E. Merrill pioneered securities sales to the middle
class. But concerns were raised over the perception
that most people invested through “margin loans,”
which involved using the value of the stock that was
to be purchased as collateral for a broker to advance
the loan. A second major concern focused on the role
of “securities affiliates,” which were brokerage
houses associated with major banks. Critics charged
that banks used bank deposits to fuel lending by the
securities affiliates, feeding speculation even more.
When the market crashed on 29 October 1929,
the Dow Jones Industrial Average witnessed a stun722

ning decline as 16 million shares changed hands.
The Crash brought investigations by the Senate
Banking and Currency Committee led by counsel
Ferdinand Pecora (“the hellhound of Wall Street”).
Pecora hauled America’s top bankers before the
committee, especially hammering Charles Mitchell
of National City Bank. Convinced that the banks
and brokers had created the boom with pure speculation, Congress passed the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, set up the Securities and
Exchange Commission, and then, in 1935, passed
the Glass-Steagall Banking Act that separated
investment from commercial banking. Subsequent
research by scholars has shown all these premises to
be false: virtually no academic has been able to verify that any genuine speculation occurred—and certainly no speculation of proportions that would generate the “Great Bull Market”—and rather than
harming banks, having a securities affiliate tended
to make a bank more stable and solvent than banks
that lacked those affiliates.
No one has yet been able to explain the specific
cause of the Great Crash. Contrary to some Keynesian economists, there is little evidence to suggest
that money was funneled into speculation or the
market. One view that remains intriguing is that the
movement through Congress of the Hawley-Smoot
Tariff, which dramatically increased tariff rates,
triggered a sell-off based on future expected price
hikes (and sales slumps).
It is also interesting to note that if the Crash was
somehow manipulated to increase profits of the
“moneyed interests,” the wealthiest industrialists on
Wall Street poured billions of dollars into securities
in an attempt to keep the market afloat. Many of
them lost their entire fortunes. Only a few, such as
Joseph P. Kennedy, a liquor-runner and father of
the future president, who entered the market after
the Crash, made money.
Among the conspiracy theorists, Wall Street has
always been a villain responsible for starting wars and
“electing” totalitarian leaders. Some groups see a
“Bolshevik-Wall Street” connection, while those subscribing to the “Reformed Christianity” doctrines of
Gary North and R. J. Rushdoony claim that Wall
Street aided and abetted the rise of Adolph Hitler.

Warren Commission Report

After World War II, Americans slowly returned
to the markets, especially investing indirectly
through large pension funds. The Dow Jones rose
steadily after World War II, but truly exploded after
the tax cuts under the administration of President
Ronald Reagan. With both income tax cuts and capital gains tax cuts enacted, Wall Street witnessed
phenomenal and steady increases that continued
until the World Trade Center attack in 2001. During that time, a new group of bond traders appeared
on the scene using a newly created security, the
“junk bond.” In fact, junk bonds were far from junk:
they financed MCI Telephone, Disney, McCaw
Cellular, and dozens of other business start-ups or
expansions. They were called junk because they had
not yet been rated by the NYSE—but many securities with an AAA rating represented nearly bankrupt companies, while junk bonds financed some of
the fastest growing sectors of the economy, especially the new high-tech ventures. Both the “junk
king,” Michael Milken of Drexel Burnham Lambert, and Ivan Boesky became wealthy through
their transactions with junk bonds. Boesky, who was
the character upon whom Michael Douglas’s “Gordon Gekko” was based in the movie Wall Street, was
arrested on charges of insider trading with some of
these securities, and in turn provided information
that implicated Milken. Both men served time in
jail for fraud.
In the 1990s, many viewed the “dot.com” boom
as a speculative manipulation similar to that of the
1920s. Nevertheless, the Dow Jones continued to
surge, topping the 11,000 mark, before the events
of September 11 brought a temporary sell-off. By
that time, however, it was unfathomable for any
individual to control enough securities to even
move a single company’s stock a point or two, let
alone to affect the entire market.
Larry Schweikart
See also: Roosevelt, Franklin Delano; Rockefeller
Family; Trusts.
References
Bruck, Connie. 1989. The Predator’s Ball. New York:
Penguin.
“Drexel: Prosecution and Fall.” 1990. Wall Street
Journal. February 15.

Gardener, Deborah. 1982. Marketplace: A Brief
History of the New York Stock Exchange. New
York: New York Stock Exchange.
Hofstadter, Richard. [1952] 1965. The Paranoid
Style in American Politics. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Sobel, Robert. 1975. NYSE: A History of the New
York Stock Exchange. New York: Weybright and
Talley.
Sutton, Anthony. 2000. “Wall Street and the Rise of
Hitler.” http://reformed-theology.org/html/books/
wall_street/index.html.

Warren Commission Report
The Warren Commission was established by President Lyndon Johnson on 29 November 1963, one
week after the assassination of his predecessor, President John F. Kennedy. The FBI was already working on assembling its findings into a report, which
Johnson had hoped would serve as the last word on
the subject, but his political advisors were urging
him to appoint a presidential commission, and he
decided that it would be a superior alternative to a
looming U.S. Senate investigation of the assassination. The commission included Supreme Court
Chief Justice Earl Warren as chairman, four U.S.
congressmen (Senators John Cooper and Richard
Russell and Representatives Hale Boggs and Gerald
Ford), and two members from the private sector
(former Assistant Secretary of War John McCloy
and ex-Director of Central Intelligence Allen
Dulles). By the time its investigation was over, the
commission and its staff of lawyers had interviewed
488 witnesses and received thousands of reports
from dozens of government agencies.
On 24 September 1964, the commission reported
to President Johnson that Lee Harvey Oswald was
the lone assassin of President Kennedy, that nightclub owner Jack Ruby had acted alone in killing
Oswald, and that the commission could find no evidence of a conspiracy in either murder. The Warren
Commission Report initially reassured an anxious
public. However, its methods and findings were soon
questioned by critics (e.g., Epstein), and by 1967 a
majority of Americans had come to believe that a
conspiracy was behind the assassination. The
723

Warren Commission Report

hundreds of books that were written on the assassination over the years arrived at three different views
of the commission. Its defenders (e.g., Ford and
Stiles) portrayed it as an honest and competent body
that explored every avenue in search of the truth. Its
legion of critics, on the other hand, saw it as either a
bungled inquiry that ignored obvious evidence of
conspiracy or, more ominously, as a deliberate coverup intended to protect the conspirators. These critics
raised questions about the commission’s “single bullet theory,” which ascribed to one almost pristine bullet all seven nonfatal wounds sustained by Kennedy
and Texas Governor John Connally, and they used
the “Zapruder film” to argue for the existence of a
“second gunman” in the assassination. Despite the
commission’s characterization of Oswald as a disaffected loner, the critics portrayed him as a man
enmeshed in the covert world of espionage and/or an
innocent patsy used to divert investigators from the
conspirators behind the assassination. It was eventually discovered that the commission was never
informed about a note delivered by Oswald to the
FBI before the assassination or about plots pursued
by the CIA against the life of Fidel Castro, facts that
could have had a significant bearing on the commission’s investigation. Members of the commission staff
assured the House Select Committee on Assassinations (HSCA) in the late 1970s that they carried out
an honest and thorough probe of the assassination.
Although the HSCA found no evidence of a deliberate cover-up, its conclusion was that the Kennedy
assassination was probably the result of a conspiracy
that had gone undetected by the commission.
Constraints on the Commission
In hindsight, it can be seen that the commission
operated under several constraints that made it unlikely that it would find a conspiracy. With a limited
investigative staff of its own, its inquiry relied largely
on the FBI, an agency that had already satisfied
itself that there was no conspiracy and behaved as if
its reputation rested on the truth of that conclusion.
High government officials sided with the FBI and
were determined to see that the public accept
Oswald’s guilt and that suspicions of conspiracy,

724

whether foreign or domestic, be rebutted by the
commission. Johnson’s own fears were clearly
revealed when, while urging Warren to head the
commission, he warned that rumors of conspiracy
could provoke a nuclear war with the Soviet Union
in which 40 million Americans would perish. Johnson’s aides also wanted to remove the assassination
as a possible factor in the 1964 presidential election
by having the commission complete its report before
election day in November, a deadline that the commission managed to meet by halting its hearings in
June and assigning the task of writing the report to
two staff members who worked nonstop until September. When three commissioners (notably Senator Russell) took exception to the single-bullet theory, the disagreement went unresolved but the
report was written as if there were consensus on all
of its findings.
Indeed, the report referred to all allegations of
conspiracy as “rumors,” implying that they were not
worthy of being taken seriously.
The question of whether or not the commission
failed to discover a conspiracy rests on whether a
conspiracy actually existed. Regardless of the persuasiveness of their criticisms, or their success in
making the idea of conspiracy appealing to many
Americans, the commission’s critics never proved
beyond a doubt the existence of any particular conspiracy. The commission’s shortcomings may have
been understandable in view of the constraints
placed upon it, but the commission was not as objective in its fact finding as it pretended to be, or
as fully informed. Like many of its critics, it too produced a theory about the assassination, but it presented its theory as if it were fact, in a sense inviting
the plethora of conspiracy theories that have competed with its lone gunman theory. The heritage left
by the Warren Commission Report was a lingering
belief in conspiracy on the part of most Americans,
the very outcome that the commission was supposed to avoid.
Larry Haapanen
See also: Kennedy, John F., Assassination of;
Oswald, Lee Harvey; Ruby, Jack.

Watergate

References
Epstein, Edward. 1966. Inquest: The Warren
Commission and the Establishment of Truth. New
York: Viking Press.
Ford, Gerald, and John Stiles. 1965. Portrait of the
Assassin. New York: BallantineBooks.
Holland, Max. 1995. “The Key to the Warren
Report.” American Heritage 46/7: 50–64.
Summers, Anthony. 1998. Not in Your Lifetime.
New York: Marlowe and Company.

Watergate
The series of events that collectively became known
as “Watergate,” after the break-in at Democratic
National Committee (DNC) offices at the Watergate building in Washington, D.C., on 17 June 1972,
represents the major verified top-level conspiracy in
U.S. political history. Watergate is a Ur-text of U.S.
conspiracy theory, evidenced by the ubiquitous use
of the suffix “-gate” to denote any major conspiracy,
cover-up, or scandal, and the belief that it forever
changed the way the public would view electoral
politics. Watergate has remained an episode of
immense interest to conspiracy researchers for several reasons. First, Watergate was a verified and
wide-reaching conspiracy that was perpetrated by
government officials, reaching to the highest level of
civil life. Second, while the break-in itself was discovered and became publicly known almost immediately, questions remain about specific details,
enabling conspiracy theories to fill this absence of
definitive knowledge. Finally, Watergate came to
represent a series of interwoven events and conspiracies, revealing the machinations of high politics. As
a consequence, the legacy of Watergate has endured
not only politically, but also socially and culturally.
The origins of Watergate lay in attempts by the
Nixon administration to deal with protest against
the Vietnam War. In July 1970, Nixon approved the
Huston Plan, which called for increased surveillance and “black bag” operations (the FBI and CIA
term for illegal entries, usually to plant surveillance
devices) against domestic targets. Although the plan
was officially abandoned after opposition from FBI
Director J. Edgar Hoover, its recommendations

would resurface in other forms. In June 1971, the
New York Times published extracts from “The Pentagon Papers,” confidential Vietnam War strategy
documents that had been leaked by former Pentagon aide Daniel Ellsberg. While initial material
concerned previous administrations, it was feared
that further disclosures would expose hitherto
secret aspects of the Nixon administration’s negotiations regarding the Vietnam War. The overt
response was direct, in that elements of the Nixon
administration began a campaign of harassment
against the press and the Times in particular.
Covertly, it established the White House Special
Investigations Unit, known as the “Plumbers,”
because its specific task was to “plug leaks.”
A background in covert operations set the tone
for the Plumbers unit and later for Watergate.
Among those recruited were G. Gordon Liddy, a
former FBI agent; E. Howard Hunt, a former CIA
member who had helped plan the Bay of Pigs invasion; former associates of Hunt who had participated in the Bay of Pigs operation; and James W.
McCord, a retired senior CIA officer. The first
Plumbers operation was a break-in at the office of
Daniel Ellsberg’s psychiatrist in an attempt to steal
Ellsberg’s medical files. The unsuccessful burglary
was preceded by an “offensive intelligence–defensive security” plan named Operation Sandwedge.
This wide-ranging plan proposed “black bag” operations against the Democrats. Although approved
by the administration, it was superseded by Liddy’s
even more expansive espionage plan, Operation
Gemstone. While the original was considered too
extreme, a revised version of Gemstone, which
included among its illegal activities a plan to surreptitiously enter DNC offices in the Watergate
building, was approved in April 1972.
Watergate Investigations
Working for the Committee to Re-elect the President (CRP), the Plumbers staged their first break-in
of the Watergate building in May 1972. Successfully
completed, transcripts of conversations recorded by
surveillance devices were passed to White House
officials. The second break-in was apparently under-

725

Watergate

taken to replace a faulty bug. The Plumbers were
caught after security guard Frank Wills discovered a
re-taped door lock. Although carrying false identification documents, “burglars” McCord, Bernard
Barker, Virgilio Gonzalez, Eugenio Martinez, and
Frank Sturgis were accurately identified soon after
their arrest. As McCord was security coordinator for
CRP, their links to the White House were quickly
established, as was Hunt’s involvement with the
break-in. Although the Nixon administration characterized Watergate as a “third-rate burglary,” attempts
to cover up its involvement began almost immediately. This cover-up would ultimately prove most
damaging to the Nixon administration, because it entailed an extensive conspiracy to obstruct justice. In
January 1973, the five burglars and Liddy and Hunt
were convicted on charges of illegal wiretapping,
burglary, and conspiracy. Prosecutors charged that
Liddy and Hunt were solely responsible for planning
the break-in.
While several top-ranking Nixon aides had already
resigned due to revelations about Watergate, the
cover-up began to unravel in April 1973 when
McCord wrote to Judge John J. Sirica, who had
presided over the trial, stating that members of the
Nixon administration had participated in the planning of the operation that included Watergate, that
government witnesses had committed perjury, and
that the defendants had been placed under “political
pressure” to plead guilty and remain silent. On 30
April Nixon announced the resignations of Attorney
General Richard Kleindienst, Chief of Staff H. R.
Haldeman, and Chief Domestic Policy Advisor John
Ehrlichman and the forced resignation of Presidential Counsel John Dean III. Accepting full responsibility for the actions of his subordinates, Nixon also
stated that new Attorney General Elliot Richardson
had been given “absolute authority” in “uncovering
the whole truth” about Watergate, including the provision to appoint an independent special prosecutor.
Although popular belief largely ascribes the
uncovering of the Watergate case to elements of the
press, authorities including the FBI, the General
Accounting Office, and the Watergate Special Prosecution Force (WSPF), headed by Archibald Cox,
undertook investigations. The WSPF had an expan726

sive charter to investigate not only Watergate and its
cover-up but all allegations against Nixon, White
House staff, and presidential appointees, including
offenses relating to the 1972 presidential election
campaign. The WSPF could examine evidence
“from any source” and contest in court White House
refusals to produce evidence. Because of such investigatory powers, “Watergate” came to represent a
range of illegal activities, including the espionage
operations that led to the break-in; previous breakins by the Plumbers including those directed against
Daniel Ellsberg; the Watergate cover-up (which
included destruction of evidence and the perjury of
numerous witnesses); “dirty tricks” used against the
1972 Democrat campaign and candidates (which
the Washington Post called a “massive campaign of
political spying and sabotage”); the illegal use of
campaign contributions (some of which had been
used to “pay off” the burglars); and contributions for
services (including a “shakedown” of the dairy
industry in exchange for price supports and an ITT
contribution connected to a favorable Justice
Department settlement in an antitrust case). Nixon’s
financial records and taxation returns were also
investigated.
Gaps and Deletions
Watergate became a public text largely due to the
televised Senate Select Committee (also known as
the “Ervin Committee”) hearings, which began on
17 May 1973. Replacing usual daytime programming, all 319 hours of the “Watergate hearings”
were broadcast. Although the key witness was John
Dean, who implicated Nixon in the cover-up, White
House aide Alexander Butterfield made the major
revelation. Butterfield reluctantly disclosed that
Nixon had taped almost all White House conversations since February 1971, meaning that a record of
Watergate-related conversations must exist. From
this moment, Nixon fought to retain physical control
of the tapes, beginning a series of legal battles that
were continued by his estate after his death, and
which only concluded after the estate reached a
financial settlement with the Justice Department in
June 2000. One week after Butterfield had disclosed
their existence, Archibald Cox subpoenaed the

Poster showing members of the Watergate affair, all labeled “apprehended” except for Richard M. Nixon. Pictured with
Nixon are James McCord, Dwight Chapin, H. R. Halderman, John Mitchell, John Erlichman, Maurice Stans, Eugenio
Martinez, G. Gordon Liddy, Charles Colson, Herbert Kalmbach, John Dean, Robert Mardian, Jeb Magruder, Bernard L.
Barker, Virgilio Gonzalez, Donald Segretti, Frank Sturgis, E. Howard Hunt, Jr., and Hugh Sloan, Jr. (Library of Congress)

727

Watergate

tapes. In response to the Supreme Court decision
that he must hand over the tapes, Nixon stated that
he would neither appeal the decision nor comply
with it. The following day Nixon pressured Richardson to fire Cox. Richardson instead resigned, followed by his deputy William Ruckelshaus; Cox was
then fired, the WSPF abolished, and its offices
sealed by FBI agents. Known as the “Saturday Night
Massacre,” the events of 20 October 1973 were perceived by many people as a form of constitutional
coup d’état. The resulting public outcry and calls for
impeachment forced Nixon to accede to giving the
tapes to the court.
Still attempting to contain their disclosures,
Nixon announced on 29 April 1974 that edited transcripts of some requested tapes would instead be
released. The transcripts effectively codified Nixon’s
words; they gave them a material existence, and they
entered and reentered the public realm in various
forms. Paperback editions became immediate bestsellers. The Nixon White House revealed by the
transcripts was as shocking for its pettiness as its
viciousness. But when the House Judiciary Committee released its own transcripts, discrepancies
between the two versions provoked accusations that
the White House transcripts had been “doctored” to
appear more favorable to Nixon. Nixon claimed the
discrepancies were the result of the committee having access to electronically enhanced tapes, enabling
them to identify words that had been, and were
labeled as, “unintelligible” in the White House transcripts, but historian Stanley Kutler insists that “significant material” was omitted under the guise of the
phrase “Material Unrelated to Presidential Action”
(Kutler, 452). Perhaps the most damaging deletions
from the White House transcripts were marked
“(adjective deleted),” and most notoriously, “(expletive deleted).” Into this erasure the public read
unspeakable language and unimaginable crimes.
While Nixon claimed that several of the subpoenaed tapes had never existed, the most startling
omission was in the form of the legendary “18minute gap.” The gap was during a tape of a NixonHaldeman meeting held three days after the Watergate break-in, and, as Haldeman’s notes showed,
occurred at the moment they began to discuss
728

Watergate. The gap was viewed by many with derision and as a sure sign of guilt, but Nixon staffers
claimed the erasure was accidental. Chief of Staff
Alexander Haig testified that a “sinister force” was
perhaps responsible for the erasure. An expert panel
on acoustics testified that the gap had almost certainly been produced on the president’s tape
machine, was caused by between five and nine separate erasures, and while it could not be judged as
either deliberate or accidental, was consistent with
the traces left by deliberate erasure. In September
2000, the National Archives and Records administration (NARA) announced a feasibility project on
the possibility of recovering the erased material.
Nixon’s personal secretary Rose Mary Woods testified that she had accidentally erased part of the
tape when she answered a telephone call, pressed
“record” instead of the “stop” button, and left her
foot on the play pedal. When she attempted to reenact this for the court, she physically could not do so;
her contorted pose, which became known as the
“Rose Mary Woods stretch,” appeared on the cover
of Newsweek with the headline, “Rose Mary’s BooBoo” (Emery, 414ff). Woods’s counsel suggested she
had been made a scapegoat, and her resulting
humiliation reflected the widespread perception of
the role of women within the Watergate scandal.
Watergate exposed not only the workings of government, but also a patriarchal system. Through the
various investigations, women in roles such as secretaries and wives were shown to possess much of the
information that could “break” the case, but were
largely relegated to social positions that allowed
proximity to knowledge and power but not the
capacity to exercise such knowledge or power
directly.
Conspiracy Theories
Nixon faced certain impeachment when the 23 June
1972 taped meeting of Nixon and Haldeman was
finally released on 5 August 1974, and he resigned
on 9 August. Known as the “Smoking Gun,” this
tape proved that Nixon was party to the Watergate
cover-up and had entered into a conspiracy to
obstruct the FBI Watergate investigation. On the
tape, Nixon instructs Haldeman to have the CIA

Watergate

pressure the FBI to drop its investigation by claiming national security interests, as a continuing investigation would reopen the “whole Bay of Pigs thing.”
Haldeman would later write that this was perhaps a
coded reference to the John F. Kennedy assassination. Warren Commission critic Mark Lane claims
that in identifying “Bay of Pigs” as signifier of “CIA
involvement in the Kennedy assassination,” Haldeman “provided a Rosetta Stone for the decipherment of the Nixon tapes” (Lane, 110). Although
there is no evidence to suggest that Nixon was referring to anything other than the Bay of Pigs invasion
itself, the intelligence backgrounds of the Watergate
burglars, and their connection to the failed invasion,
inspired the interest of some conspiracy researchers
who believe that President Kennedy was assassinated because Robert Kennedy had failed to provide sufficient air cover for the invaders. Several
researchers claimed to have identified Hunt and
Sturgis as two of the “three tramps” photographed at
Dealey Plaza soon after Kennedy’s assassination,
going on to allege that they were the shooters.
While some researchers drew a literal connection
between the assassination of John F. Kennedy and
Watergate, others metaphorically connected them
in a way that has had a more significant cultural influence. For some in the conspiracy research and
wider communities, these two events, each so difficult to decipher or delimit, were perceived to have
been caused by conspiratorial forces, with actual or
purported participants who were members of the
government or intelligence forces conspiratorially
acting against the Constitution. Rather than the official and visible government ruling the nation, such
theories posited that control was in fact held by the
invisible “para-government” or forces of “deep politics,” in the terminology of Peter Dale Scott.
As a result, Watergate is a central part of many
conspiracy theories. It features prominently in “A
Skeleton Key to the Gemstone File,” an edited version (put together by Stephanie Caruana, a reporter
for Playgirl) of an intriguing, much photocopied
manuscript that began to circulate in conspiracy
research communities in the 1970s. According to
this document, the name of Liddy’s Operation
Gemstone was inspired by some of the actual gem-

stones of the manuscript’s supposed author, Bruce
Roberts. Reminiscent of claims about the “mysterious deaths” of Kennedy assassination witnesses, the
“Skeleton Key” claims that Beverley Kaye, secretary
to Stephen Bull (special assistant to Nixon and one
of three people who knew of Nixon’s taping system)
was “sodium morphate ‘heart attacked’” after hearing the erased “18-minute gap” tape (Caruana, 30).
In an article written only weeks after the break-in,
the conspiracy researcher Mae Brussell accurately
identified elements of the Watergate conspiracies
that were not discovered by the various investigatory bodies for months. Many events connected to
Watergate were recontextualized in light of the conspiracy theories that surrounded it. When Dorothy
Hunt, wife of E. Howard Hunt, was killed in a
plane crash in December 1972, some argued she
had been murdered in the “Watergate Plane Crash”
while carrying hush money to pay off the burglars.
The Significance of Watergate
Indeterminacy remains about certain aspects of
Watergate, such as the motive for the break-in. Early
theories proposed that the burglars intended to
search the office of DNC Chairman Larry O’Brien,
either for material that would prove embarrassing to
the Democrats because of O’Brien’s links to Howard
Hughes, or for damaging information that O’Brien
may have held on financial connections between
Nixon and Hughes, such as the illegal campaign contribution Hughes had made to Nixon, or the Hughes
loan to Nixon’s brother, Donald. Such uncertainty
has inspired “revisionist” histories as well as conspiracy theories. A prominent revisionist reading is Jim
Hougan’s Secret Agenda: Watergate, Deep Throat
and the CIA (1984), in which he argues that the official version of Watergate is a “counterfeit history.”
He claims that McCord and Hunt had never left the
CIA, with Hunt effectively spying on the White
House while working for it, and that McCord had
deliberately sabotaged the break-in to protect CIA
operations. For Hougan, Watergate was not so much
a political operation and scandal as one instigated by
the intelligence community. Developing Hougan’s
thesis, Len Colodny and Robert Gettlin’s Silent
Coup: The Removal of Richard Nixon (1991) argues
729

Watergate

that Watergate was a John Dean “operation”
designed to retrieve information that would otherwise link his future wife Maureen to a powerful prostitution ring. According to this theory, Watergate was
part of a covert “reactionary” coup against Nixon by
elements of the military.
Colodny and Gettlin propose that Alexander Haig,
Nixon’s chief of staff after the resignation of Haldeman, was Washington Post journalist Bob Woodward’s informant known as “Deep Throat.” The identity of the mysterious inside informant has inspired
intense speculation since the character was immortalized in the book by Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward, All the President’s Men (1974), and the Alan J.
Pakula film of the same name (1976). In fact, almost
every person involved with the Nixon White House,
including Nixon, has at one time or another been
proffered as Deep Throat, as have countless others.
While some consider the character to be a composite, or even a literary device introduced to heighten
suspense, Woodward, Bernstein, and then-editor of
the Washington Post Benjamin Bradlee—the only
people who know the “identity” of Deep Throat—
insist that he is an actual individual whose identity
will only be revealed upon his death. The identity of
Deep Throat is one of the enduring mysteries of
Watergate, in that it emblematically represents the
uncertainties that still surround the entire event.
While some of the “facts” about Watergate are a
matter of the public record, including details of its
investigation, the records of criminal trials, and the
conviction and imprisonment of many of its participants, others are still open to speculation. But
debate regarding its overall “meaning” has a larger
social resonance. For some, Watergate was an overarching constitutional crisis; for others, such as
Noam Chomsky, who said it was “small potatoes”
compared to more severe—and unremarked—government crimes, Watergate was little more than the
revelation of “politics as usual.” Nixon wrote in his
Memoirs that “there was not one truth about Watergate. . . . it was like a Rorschach ink blot: others,
looking at our actions, pointed out a pattern that we
ourselves had not seen” (Nixon, 831–832). Watergate is not an “empty signifier,” but an open one; it
is an interconnected series of conspiracies, the
730

interpretation of which has almost innumerable
possibilities. As a publicly known and “proven” conspiracy, Watergate has a unique status, in that it
serves to validate other conspiracy theories. From
the time these interconnected conspiracies became
known, Watergate was the measure against which
other conspiracy theories could be judged. The verified criminality of the Watergate conspiracy was
projected onto numerous others. Watergate effectively changed the social status of conspiracy theory,
for if this conspiracy could take place at the height
of power, at its most visible, then any could.
Karen Gai Dean
See also: Brussell, Mae; Central Intelligence
Agency; Federal Bureau of Investigation; Hughes,
Howard; Kennedy, John F., Assassination of; Liddy,
G. Gordon; Nixon, Richard; Pakula, Alan J.;
Patriarchy; Pentagon Papers.
References
Ben-Veniste, Richard, and George Frampton, Jr.
1977. Stonewall: The Legal Case against the
Watergate Conspirators. New York: Simon and
Schuster.
Brussell, Mae. 1972. “Why Was Martha Mitchell
Kidnapped?” The Realist, August, 27–43.
Caruana, Stephanie. 1992. “A Skeleton Key to the
Gemstone File.” Pp. 6–37 in The Gemstone File,
ed. Jim Keith. Atlanta, GA: IllumiNet.
Colodny, Len, and Robert Gettlin. 1991. Silent
Coup: The Removal of Richard Nixon. London:
Victor Gollancz.
Emery, Fred. 1994. Watergate: The Corruption and
Fall of Richard Nixon. London: Random House.
Hougan, Jim. 1984. Secret Agenda: Watergate, Deep
Throat and the CIA. New York: Random House.
Kutler, Stanley I. 1990. The Wars of Watergate: The
Last Crisis of Richard Nixon. New York: Knopf.
———., ed. 1997. Abuse of Power: The New Nixon
Tapes. New York: Free Press.
Lane, Mark. 1991. Plausible Denial: Was the CIA
Involved in the Assassination of JFK? Melbourne:
Bookman.
Nixon, Richard. 1979. The Memoirs of Richard
Nixon. London: Arrow.
Schudson, Michael. 1993. Watergate in American
Memory: How We Remember, Forget and
Reconstruct the Past. New York: Basic.
Washington Post, ed. 1974. The Presidential
Transcripts in Conjunction with the Staff of the
Washington Post. New York: Dell.

Weathermen

Weissman, Steve, ed. 1974. Big Brother and the
Holding Company: The World behind Watergate.
Palo Alto: Ramparts.
Website
National Archives and Records Administration,
“Nixon Tapes:” http://www.nara.gov/nixon/tapes/
index.html.

Weathermen
A radical offshoot of the Students for a Democratic
Society (SDS), the Weathermen organization was
formed as a vanguard to promote armed struggle in
the United States. The group, alternatively referred
to as “Weatherman” or simply “Weather,” saw its
purpose as attacking U.S. imperialism and supporting black liberation by, in the words of Weathermen
leader Bernardine Dohrn, “building a fucking white
revolutionary movement.”
Published in the 18 June 1969 edition of the
SDS’s newspaper New Left Notes, “You Don’t Need
a Weatherman to Know Which Way the Wind
Blows . . .” (a lyric borrowed from Bob Dylan’s “Subterranean Homesick Blues”) was the founding statement of the Weathermen organization. In the position piece, the Weathermen emphasized the
primary importance of attacking U.S. imperialism by
supporting black liberation in the United States; recognized the black community as an oppressed
“colony” within the United States; stated that socialism would necessarily replace capitalism once the
current U.S. system was overthrown; held that
working with reform movements in a united front
was counterrevolutionary; and pledged support to
all struggles for self-determination in colonial environs. Three days after publication, at the 1969 Students for a Democratic Society National Convention, the SDS split apart as the Weathermen faction
expelled the Maoist Progressive Labor bloc and
allied with another faction, the Revolutionary Youth
Movement II (RYM II).
In October 1969, vowing to “bring the war home,”
the Weathermen took to the streets of Chicago to
demonstrate against the war in Vietnam, show support for the Black Panther Party, and to evidence
solidarity with all political prisoners, especially Black
Panther leader Huey P. Newton and the Chicago 8

(later 7), who were on trial for conspiracy to incite
riots during the 1968 Democratic National Convention. The Weathermen had hoped that tens of thousands of youths would descend upon the Windy City
and “tear the motherfucker apart.” However, from 8
to 12 October, the “Days of Rage,” only several hundred revolutionaries, donning helmets and carrying
clubs, rampaged through the streets, vandalizing
property and clashing with police. When the actions,
which began with the Weathermen’s bombing of the
Haymarket police statue, had ended, there were a
total of 284 arrests (40 felonies) with bail charges in
excess of $1.5 million. In addition, fifty-seven police
officers had been hospitalized and over $1 million in
damages had resulted.
In December 1969, the Weathermen convened a
“War Council” in Flint, Michigan. In the wake of
the low turnout during the “Days of Rage,” the
council came to a decision that attempting to build
a large-scale white revolutionary force was fruitless
and that street-fighting tactics were too costly for
the organization. Instead, the Weathermen decided
to go underground and engage in a clandestine,
armed struggle in support of black militants and
national liberation movements. By February 1970,
all remaining members (several hundred at this
point) of the Weathermen had gone underground
and formed small cells of three to five people that
were committed to armed action. On 7 March
1970, one of these cells, operating in Greenwich
Village, New York City, was building bombs when
an accidental explosion occurred. Three members
of the Weathermen were killed in the blast. Just ten
days later, indictments were handed down in connection with the October 1969 “Days of Rage.”
Twelve Weathermen members, most of the group’s
leaders, were charged with conspiracy to cross state
lines with intent to incite a riot.
On 9 June 1970, the Weathermen bombed New
York City police headquarters, and on 26 July a
military-police guard post in San Francisco’s Presidio
Army base and a Manhattan Bank of America branch
were similarly struck. On 13 September 1970, the
Weathermen orchestrated the prison escape of Harvard psychologist-turned-LSD guru Timothy Leary,
followed by the bombing of the police statue in
731

Weathermen

Members of the Weathermen march across the Chicago River bridge to the downtown Loop, October 11, 1969. Militant
radicals went on a window smashing spree and battled police before the eyes of startled shoppers. At least thirty-five
people were arrested and the Illinois National Guard was called out. (Bettman/Corbis)

Chicago’s Haymarket Square (the second time in one
year that the group had done this) on 5 October, a
blast at the Marin County, California, courthouse on
8 October, and the 9 October bombing of a Long
Island, New York, court building.
On 10 December 1970, the organization publicly
changed its name, signing its latest communiqué,
titled “New Morning, Changing Weather,” as the
“Weather Underground.” In the statement, a
stronger role for women within the Weathermen
was evidenced, a critique of the group’s past actions
and ideology was made, and philosophical changes
taking place within the organization were outlined.
Throughout 1971, the Weather Underground continued its bombing campaign with attacks on the
U.S. Capitol, prison offices in San Francisco, Sacramento, and San Mateo, California, the New York
commissioner of corrections’ offices, and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology offices of former
732

presidential advisor and Vietnam War escalationadvocate McGeorge Bundy.
In May 1972 the Weather Underground exploded
a bomb in the air force wing of the Pentagon and, in
the face of new government indictments of conspiracy to bomb police departments handed down in
December 1972, continued its terrorist campaign
throughout 1973. In the summer of 1974, the
Weather Underground issued Prairie Fire: The Politics of Revolutionary Anti-Imperialism. The first
detailed statement of the group’s politics since June
1969, Prairie Fire included self-criticism, aims for
the future, and a history of the organization. The
document also revealed the group’s new understanding that a U.S. revolution was not imminent
and that such an event would be “complicated and
protracted.” Prairie Fire also issued a challenge to
the anti-imperialist movement to continue its rebellion. Finally, the text provided detailed analysis of

Whiskey Rebellion

feminism and the role of women in the revolutionary movement.
The Weathermen’s bombing campaign continued
in 1975, with attacks on the Washington, D.C.,
offices of the Agency for International Development
and the Oakland, California, offices of the Department of Defense on 23 January, and the bombings of
the Banco de Ponce offices in New York City’s Rockefeller Center and the Salt Lake City, Utah, headquarters of the Kennecott Corporation on 16 June.
In 1976, the Weather Underground split into two
factions, due to philosophical differences over issues
of race, gender, and organizational approaches. By
the end of the year, however, one of the factions—
the Central Committee—saw its members leave or
be expelled from the group while the other, the Bay
Area Revolutionary Committee (BARC), assumed
the mantle of the Weather Underground.
In 1977 and 1978, six members of the Weather
Underground surfaced and surrendered to authorities, leaving fifteen Weather fugitives still living
underground. Weather Underground members
continued to surface voluntarily or to be captured
by law enforcement during the 1980s, with the final
Weather fugitive wanted under federal charges
arrested in 1987.
Nicholas Turse
See also: Chicago 7.
References
Bloom, Alexander, and Wini Breines. 1995. “Takin’
It to the Streets”: A Sixties Reader. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Jacobs, Harold, ed. 1970. Weatherman. Berkeley,
CA: Ramparts Press.
Jacobs, Ron. The Way the Wind Blew: A History of
the Weather Underground. New York: Verso.
Peck, Abe. [1985] 1991. Uncovering the Sixties: The
Life and Times of the Underground Press. New
York: Citadel Press.

Whiskey Rebellion
In October 1794, President George Washington
called out roughly 13,000 militia men from Virginia,
Maryland, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania to march to
Pittsburgh and crush an armed rebellion against federal tax collectors in western Pennsylvania. Washing-

ton, Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton,
and fellow members of the governing Federalist
Party were convinced that certain popular “republican” societies were conspiring against the administration. The Federalists feared that local organizations,
hostile to federal policies, were secretly fomenting
open rebellion among disgruntled farmers and distillers in the rural counties west of the Allegheny
Mountains.
The events leading up to muster of troops resulted
from a series of clashes between farmers and tax collectors over an excise tax on whiskey. Hamilton
ostensibly launched the tax in 1791 to pay for debts
incurred during the American Revolution and for the
protection of settlers on the western frontier. For the
backwoods farmers of western Pennsylvania, Hamilton’s tax seemed overly burdensome and evidence of
an eastern conspiracy among wealthy elites and the
government. The farmers needed to distill their grain
into whiskey, or “Monongahela Rye,” as an economical way to transport their produce across the
Allegheny Mountains to profitable markets in the
east. Due to a shortage of money in the west, whiskey
also served as a form of currency in the rapidly
expanding frontier. This taxation brought to the forefront western resentment of the economic power
maintained by the government and the wealthy east
of the Alleghenies. The tax seemed to be a direct
assault on the economic lifeblood of the area. Not to
be intimidated, farmers often responded by tarring
and feathering local collectors, destroying compliant
stills, and routinely blocking roads to the east with
piles of manure, ditches, and fallen trees (Bouton).
Over the next three years, tensions increased as those
who did not comply were threatened with fines and
imprisonment.
The “Rebellion”
By the summer of 1794, opposition to the tax had
become increasingly violent and solidified against
federal authority. On 16 July in Washington County,
a mob of angry farmers attempted to destroy records
of the fines and taxes they owed by laying siege to
and eventually burning the house of federal collector General John Neville. In an ensuing gunfight,
two of the insurgents were killed. On 23 July, these
733

Whiskey Rebellion

farmers met with the “Mingo Creek Society” and
other residents of the area to solidify their position
against the federal government. It was decided,
largely at the request of lawyer and author Hugh
Henry Brackenridge, to wait until August when a
more formal meeting could be called to assess the
collective will of western Pennsylvania. However,
ten days later, some of the insurgents intercepted
and read U.S. mail from citizens in nearby Pittsburgh to determine the town’s attitudes toward the
rebellion. Some of the letters were written to prominent Federalists and contained threats against the
insurgents and denunciations of their cause. The
insurgents were outraged. Under the leadership of
self-appointed general David Bradford, a prominent
but eccentric lawyer, they proposed a march on
Pittsburgh to capture and imprison those who had
written the letters. By this time, the whole of western Pennsylvania had heard about the killings at
Neville’s house and, in response to a general muster
called by Bradford, approximately 7,000 men turned
up on 1 August at Braddock’s Field outside Pittsburgh, ready to march on the town. Largely through
the negotiations and delay tactics of moderates like
Brackenridge and the quick-thinking Pittsburghers
(they fed and welcomed the insurgents as they
paraded through the streets), the rebels had little
energy for destroying the town by the time they
marched. Only a few houses were looted, and the
barn of General Neville’s son was burned. By the
end of the day, less than 100 of the “whiskey rebels”
remained in Pittsburgh.
Federal Reaction
On 7 August Washington issued a proclamation that
detailed his interpretation of the events leading up
to the rebellion, blaming “certain irregular meetings” and “combinations” in Pennsylvania’s western
counties for creating unrest among the farmers. The
Federalists publicly sought a peaceful solution by
dispatching a commission to negotiate an end to the
rebellion. Tensions lessened, and the majority of
westerners favored reconciliation. However, there
were still sizable numbers of radicals advocating
rebellion, and while negotiations continued through
August, Hamilton and Washington secretly pre734

pared for war. Seeking a show of federal strength
and worried that “committees of correspondence”
were trying to unite conspirators against the union in
other western states, Hamilton asked Governor
Henry Lee of Virginia to secretly draft a 12,950-man
army and postdate his orders to 1 September so that
it would appear the government had sought a peaceful solution in good faith. By the end of September,
the commission, unable to reach complete reconciliation with the farmers, asked Washington to send
troops to western Pennsylvania. But when the
troops eventually reached Pittsburgh at the end of
October, the rebellion had subsided through the
efforts and negotiations of moderates (Brackenridge). Hoping to maintain peace and support for
the federal government, Washington magnanimously pardoned the known insurrectionists, with
the exception of David Bradford, who escaped down
the Ohio River in a canoe to Spanish territory.
Analysis
While historians recognize the Whiskey Rebellion as
the first great test of America’s federal government
against subversion, they also suggest that the “conspiracy” accusations launched by Federalists and
rebels alike were really passionate reactions to a
number of social, political, and economic factors
central to the new Republic. To the whiskey rebels,
the government was unfairly generating revenue
from produce grown in the west instead of taxing the
eastern land speculators who actually owned much
of the western Pennsylvania farmland the grain was
grown on. The tax, in their estimation, was proof
that the government was conspiring with economic
and political elites in Philadelphia and the east to
oppress the western country. Scholarship does suggest that Hamilton initially launched the whiskey tax
as an ideological power play, designed to prove the
federal government could tax anywhere within its
boundaries. He welcomed the rebellion as a way to
display the integrity of the newly formed federal system and show its ability to enforce domestic policies
(Slaughter). From the federal side, Washington’s
accusations that the Whiskey Rebellion was part of a
larger western conspiracy against the government
indicate a fear early Anglophile Federalists enter-

White Slave Trade

tained that the liberalism and violence of the French
Revolution would spill over into the less “civilized”
populace of America. The existence of several Francophile political societies (some established by
French foreign minister Edmond Genet) in
Philadelphia and the western states (Koschnik) was
evidence enough to convince Washington that a network of subversives was at work to undermine the
Federalists’ power. While much of the resistance to
the tax was random and loosely organized, some
western Pennsylvanians, following the lead of
Philadelphia, did create Jacobin-like “Republican
societies” for the purpose of reducing federal power,
and the whiskey tax was a perfect rallying point for
them.
Charles Bradshaw
See also: Genet, Citizen Edmond Charles;
Hamilton, Alexander; Shays’ Rebellion.
References
Bouton, Terry. 2000. “A Road Closed: Rural
Insurgency in Post-Independence Pennsylvania.”
Journal of American History 87 (3): 855–887.
Brackenridge, Hugh Henry. [1795] 1972. Incidents
in the Insurrection, ed. Daniel Marder. New
Haven, CT: College and University Press.
Gould, Roger V. 1998. “Political Networks and the
Local/National Boundary in the Whiskey
Rebellion.” Pp. 36–54 in Challenging Authority:
The Historical Study of Contentious Politics, ed.
Michael P. Hanagan et al. Vol. 7. Social
Movements, Protest, and Contention Series.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press
Koschnik, Albrecht. “The Democratic Societies of
Philadelphia and the Limits of the American
Public Sphere, circa 1793–1795.” The William
and Mary Quarterly 58: 615-636.
Slaughter, Thomas P. 1986. The Whiskey Rebellion:
Frontier Epilogue to the American Revolution.
New York: Oxford University Press.

White Slave Trade
During the Great White Slavery Scare of 1907–
1914, the U.S. public devoured a flood of speeches,
pamphlets, magazine articles, plays, novels, books,
and films about the so-called white slave traffic.
These sensational materials, which included the
first full-length feature film, spread the alarming

message that a secret vice syndicate was reaping
huge profits through forced prostitution. Sixty thousand innocent women a year, it was said, were held
as sex slaves by means of force, trickery, seduction,
drugging, debt peonage, social shame, and venereal
disease. The belief in white slavery was widespread:
cities formed investigative commissions and Congress passed laws (notably the Mann Act of 1910).
Historians doubt that white slavery existed, yet the
campaign to abolish it was arguably one of the most
important moral crusades of the Progressive Era.
The scare waned when evidence repeatedly failed
to emerge and World War I diverted attention to
other threats, but remnants of white slavery lore
have survived the century.
The image of the prostitute as an innocent white
slave began in Europe, where by the 1880s the alarm
was raised that white, European women who ventured abroad—sometimes to work as prostitutes—
were being captured for sexual exploitation by colonial subjects. In the United States, similarly, white
slavery fears took hold in reaction to stepped-up
immigration and women’s expanding opportunities
and increasing mobility. The term “white slavery”
implies that the victims are racially distinct; and
indeed, the earliest U.S. white slavery fears expressed
a racist, nativist fear of foreign infiltration, particularly by Jews and southern Europeans, and the first
white slavery laws were immigration controls.
But the scare reached its peak when a U.S. version of white slavery evolved. Drawing on the
national shame and horror over black chattel slavery, white slavery writings—which were clearly intended for a white consumer—exploited the term’s
implication that the enslavement of whites is especially evil. Using proto-abolitionist rhetoric to call
for the abolition of this heinous, “blacker” form of
slavery, white slavery writers suggested that to be
roused to moral indignation on the part of these
poor women—who might, after all, be one’s “own”
sister or daughter—was tantamount to joining an
abolitionist crusade.
U.S. white slavery writing also incorporated the
central reformist impulse of the Progressive Era: to
save democracy from erosion by big business. Starting in 1907, when McClure’s magazine published a
735

White Slave Trade

serial exposé of the vice business in Chicago, the
U.S. public got a complex version of white slavery in
which the traffickers included harmless-looking
U.S. citizens and the crime syndicate was a nationwide industry working hand in hand with foreign
traffickers and corrupt officials. The white slavery
business, with its network of related enterprises—
liquor and drugs, abortionists, procurers, beauticians, government infiltrators—was a sinister
reflection of the vertically integrated corporations
and monopolies, the trusts and syndicates, that
were being exposed and broken up by Progressive
Era reform efforts.
Other major cities published similar pieces on bigcity vice and the growing public outcry provoked the
Senate to extend government’s power to bar and
deport aliens suspected of trafficking, while the 1910
Mann Act (aka the White Slave Traffic Act) made it
a felony to “aid, entice or force a woman to cross state
lines for the purpose of prostitution or debauchery,
or for any other immoral purpose.” Aside from these
laws and some stepped-up brothel-raiding, the socalled Great War on White Slavery involved very little in the way of actual reform. The scare probably
brought increased financial and moral support to
social welfare work among working-class women and
prostitutes: Jane Addams, for example, used white
slavery rhetoric to draw attention to the struggles and
worthiness of the women she served. But for the
most part, the scare was a textual and representational phenomenon made possible by the boom in
urban populations consuming popular media and
fueled by competition for that market as much as by
the generally reformist climate of the time.
The White Slavery Genre
The set piece of white slavery collections was the
white slave narrative, which drew on the conventions of melodrama to portray a sunny, innocent girlhood brutally severed by the evil traffickers. The
heroic exploits of lawmen were also featured; these
tales of investigation, rescue, and punishment,
which often incorporated criminals’ sensational confessions, are related to the detective story and to the
earlier “mysteries and miseries of the city” genre,
which offered shocking glimpses of the exotic degra736

dations of the urban poor. In lawmens’ narratives,
undercover heroes adopted elaborate concealments
and disguises, penetrating the secret criminal enterprise by means of an equally conspiratorial law
enforcement network.
The great popularity of white slavery materials
was clearly due to their titillating entertainment
value. But at the same time, their content—particularly their disturbing depictions of a ubiquitous conspiracy—reflected and grappled with unsettling
social changes. Prostitution had boomed as the cities
grew, and criminalization of the sex trade had created vice districts and driven prostitutes onto the
streets, forcing residents to wonder where all these
young, white prostitutes came from, and where they
ended up. And where were the increasing numbers
of daughters and sisters who were leaving towns and
families for big city life, never to be heard from
again? Answering these unsettling questions, the
white slavery conspiracy theory gave assurances that
prostitution was never freely entered into by anyone
resembling a middle-class white woman and that
prostitutes never reemerged into mainstream society (the white slave nearly always ends up dead).
The conspiracy theory foreclosed on the perceived
threat to family life posed by a booming market
economy that offered women increased independence by depicting women as doomed without the
protective agency of the family.
Portrayals of secret white slavery syndicates
transposed anxiety about big business into a melodrama with clear moral demarcations. Progressive
Era campaigns to regulate business and break up
trusts and monopolies were often set in motion by
exposés uncovering the secret machinations and
tyrannical reach of corporate barons like Rockefeller. White slavery conspiracy depictions, similarly, portrayed a consolidation of power in the
hands of coercive economic agents, with resulting
corrosion of democratic institutions, families, and
even individual self-determination. In white slavery
materials, however, readers were given a sense of
empowerment against such vast forces. Enabled to
see through the veil of secrecy and to learn how to
protect women, and privileged to vicariously take
part in brothel raids, the consumers of white slavery

Whitewater

materials could experience themselves as moral
agents with a clear position and purpose.
The scare peaked during a period of significant
demographic shifts when urban growth, spurred by
booming industry and commerce, coincided with the
effects of vastly increased immigration. Geographical, national, ethnic, racial, and social boundaries
were in flux. White slavery writings reflected the fear
of corrupting alien presences whose foreign ways—
not least their foreign languages—made them seem
sinister and mysterious. Weakened social boundaries
were reinstated in white slavery writings’ demarcation between “us” and “them,” while cultural
integrity was boiled down to a contest over woman as
the repository of cultural stability and familial and
social identity.
Conspiratorial Sex Trafficking since 1980
In recent decades, sex trafficking media stories and
reform campaigns have reemerged. That this contemporary fear over international “trafficking in persons” coincides with stepped-up globalization lends
additional plausibility to the hypothesis that sex slavery conspiracy theories can reflect anxieties caused
by weakened geographic and demographic boundaries. A growing number of international and domestic organizations, campaigns, and legislative reforms
seek to uncover and punish those who use deception
and force to coerce women into sex work. The Progressive Era fear of corrupting foreign infiltration is
echoed in depictions of the foreign traffickers as
gangs linked up with crooked foreign governments.
The U.S. media is giving increasing coverage to tellall exposés and accounts of brothel raids, which
sometimes closely resemble Progressive Era materials—except that the imported female “sex slaves” are
usually not white, but Asian or Latin American
women presented as vulnerable and helpless (i.e.,
innocent) due to their poverty. In media stories and
in reports generated by reform organizations, prostitution is foregrounded over other kinds of labor
exploitation, and women migrants are rarely acknowledged to be knowingly entering prostitution.
Margit Stange
See also: Nativism.

References
Altink, Sietske. 1996. Stolen Lives: Trading Women
into Sex and Slavery. Binghampton, NY: Haworth
Press.
Connelly, Mark. 1980. The Response to Prostitution
in the Progressive Era. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press.
Cordasco, Francesco, et al. 1991. The White Slave
Trade and the Immigrants. Detroit, MI: Blaine
Ethridge.
Global Survival Network (GSN). 1997. “Crime and
Servitude.” Washington, DC.
Grittner, Frederick K. 1990. White Slavery: Myth,
Ideology, and American Law. New York: Garland
Publishing.
Roe, Clifford. [1911] 1979. The Great War on White
Slavery or Fighting for the Protection of Our
Girls. No pub. Reproduced in facsimile by
Garland Publishing, New York and London.
Stange, Margit. 1998. Personal Property: Wives,
White Slaves, and the Market in Women.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
U.S. Department of State. 2000. Victims of
Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000:
Trafficking in Persons Report. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
Websites
Captive Daughters: http://www.captivedaughters.
org.
U.S. Deptartment of State home page on trafficking:
http://usinfo.state.gov/topical/global/traffic/.

Whitewater
“Whitewater” refers to U.S. president William Jefferson Clinton’s alleged financial wrongdoings in a
labyrinthine Arkansas land deal during the late
1970s and 1980s. The scandal, which emerged in
1992, also generated various conspiracy theories
accusing Clinton and his wife Hillary of going to
great lengths, including murder, to cover up incriminating evidence.
The Whitewater controversy originated in 1978,
when Clinton, who served as Arkansas attorney
general, his wife, and friends James and Susan
McDougal created the Whitewater Development
Corporation to turn 220 acres of riverfront property
into vacation homes. According to financial filings
by the Clintons, they eventually lost $40,000 in this
737

Whitewater

partnership. James McDougal’s other business, the
Madison Savings and Loan Association, for which
Hillary Clinton did legal work as a partner at the
Rose Law Firm in Little Rock, also went bankrupt
because of several fraudulent loans.
Both of the McDougals served jail time for illegal
loan and land schemes, and a federal grand jury
headed by special prosecutor Robert F. Fiske, Jr.,
then Kenneth W. Starr, then Robert Ray, investigated the Clintons from 1994 to 2000 to determine
their involvement in this fraudulent bankruptcy. On
20 September 2000, Ray eventually concluded that
there was insufficient evidence to indict the Clintons, thus ending the six-year Whitewater investigation, but various incidents during the investigation
sparked many conspiracy theories according to
which the Clintons actively, and successfully, covered up their past illegal activities.
Among other bizarre incidents, Hillary Clinton
insisted that she miraculously discovered in January
1996 in her White House private quarters documents regarding her legal work for Madison Savings
and Loan. These documents had been subpoenaed
by Whitewater investigators two years before and
claimed lost.
Bill Clinton insisted that he did not know about a
fraudulent $300,000 federally backed loan to Susan
McDougal, even though McDougal invested part of
the money in the Whitewater Development Corp.,
and even though Little Rock judge David Hale, who
made the loan, testified that he lent money under
Clinton’s orders. Susan McDougal, who denied
Clinton’s involvement and served eighteen months
in jail for contempt of court, allegedly refused to talk
because Clinton pressured her to do so.
Friends of Bill Clinton gave more than $700,000
to former associate attorney general and partner in
the Rose Law Firm Webster L. Hubbell, whom
Whitewater investigators were interrogating, suggesting that they hoped to buy Hubbell’s silence.
Hubbell was sentenced for tax evasion and misleading testimony, but he continually maintained that
the Clintons were not involved. The Supreme Court
cleared him of the misleading testimony charge
because evidence obtained under an immunity
agreement was used in the case.
738

The most ardent conspiracy theorists also argue
that White House counsel and Clinton friend Vince
Foster, who shot himself on 20 July 1993 in Fort
Macy Park, Virginia, under the strain of the Whitewater investigation and other scandals, was in fact
murdered on Clinton’s orders. Suspicions arose
when documents disappeared from Foster’s office
following his death, and when his suicide note was
not released for thirty hours.
Evidence remains insufficient to substantiate
these conspiracy theories. Various federal investigators, including Starr himself, concluded that Foster
killed himself. Republican senators, after months of
Whitewater hearings, uncovered no hard evidence
that the Clintons had committed illegal wrongdoings. In 1998, Starr shifted the focus of his investigation to another scandal, investigating whether
Clinton and White House intern Monica Lewinsky
had had sexual relations, then lied about it. This
investigation proved more fruitful. The day before
leaving office, Clinton reached a deal with independent prosecutor Robert Ray under which he confessed to having given false testimony regarding his
relationship with Ms. Lewinsky, lost his law license
for five years, and paid a $25,000 fine.
Republican congressmen’s eagerness to investigate various scandals, including Whitewater and
others involving Lewinsky, Paula Jones, the White
House travel office, FBI files of prominent Republicans, and Arkansas state troopers, along with prosecutors’ inability to substantiate many of these
charges, pushed Hillary Clinton to declare on 27
January 1998 that there was an ongoing plot, not to
cover up Clinton’s misdeeds, but to smear him and
his wife as part of a “vast right-wing conspiracy.”
Philippe R. Girard
See also: Clinton, Bill and Hillary; Clinton Body
Count; Foster, Vince.
References
McDougal, Jim, and Curtis Wilkie. 1998. Arkansas
Mischief: The Birth of a National Scandal. New
York: Henry Holt.
Stephanopoulos, George. 1999. All Too Human: A
Political Education. Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
Stewart, James B. 1996. Blood Sport: The President
and his Adversaries. New York: Simon and
Schuster.

Witchcraft

Witchcraft
Few episodes from America’s colonial past are as
well known or as notorious as the Salem witchcraft
trials of 1692. For many, the Salem trials have represented the defining moment in the history of
Puritan conspiracy-minded intolerance and superstition; however, belief in magic and witchcraft was
an inextricable part of the seventeenth-century
worldview. Witches were prosecuted in Europe and
in all of the American colonies, not just in Puritan
New England. While historians have produced
competing explanations for colonial witchcraft
belief, and though perhaps no ultimate explanation
is possible, they have described many of the social,
cultural, and religious conditions in which witches
could be identified and witch-hunts could gain
momentum. Briefly stated, a witch was understood
to be a person who had made a pact with Satan to
harm neighbors, the community, or the state
through supernatural means. A witch, in other
words, was a devil-worshipper, someone whose
actions constituted a criminal and heretical conspiracy to destroy orderly Christian society.
A World of Wonders
Colonial Americans lived in an enchanted universe, a
“world of wonders,” as historian David D. Hall has
phrased it (Hall, 71). Their world was one where the
supernatural infused the natural, where God and
Satan were active agents in daily events, and where
storms, disasters, illness, and crop failure were “special providences” demonstrating God’s will or displeasure. Existence and livelihood were often precarious in early America, and from a rich fund of
popular religious beliefs people chose the practices
or rituals that might offer some sort of added protection from catastrophe. Magic and countermagic,
spells, astrology, divination, palmistry, and witch lore
were employed to predict the future, or heal the ill,
to harm enemies, or to defend against occult attack
(Godbeer, 7). In the seventeenth century, local folk
magic practitioners called “cunning folk,” “conjurors,” “white witches,” or “wizards” were
omnipresent—though often suspicious—members
of English and American society to whom people
could turn for assistance.

Witches were a malevolent part of this world of
wonders. While the practice of magic was an
accepted component of folk belief, witchcraft had
more sinister connotations. A witch was someone
who had acquired superhuman powers through a
covenant with Satan; chief among these powers was
the ability to perform maleficium, or to cause harm
through supernatural means. The types of maleficium varied. Witches were often accused of causing
illness or death, or causing miscarriages, or spoiling
beer or butter. They were believed to torment their
enemies in other ways, by invisibly entering the
rooms of sleeping people and choking them, or turning themselves into animals to carry out their evil
deeds. They were also said to be able to tempt others
to join in their satanic pact by a look or glance, or by
sending out their specters to haunt their enemies.
People under this kind of satanic influence were
believed to be “possessed,” a condition that often
manifested itself in inexplicable physical contortions
or illnesses. And while belief in magic and witchcraft
was characteristic of popular and elite layers of early
American society, for clergymen especially the real or
imagined presence of witches was profoundly troubling. In making a covenant with Satan, the witch
was rejecting God and godly society. This import of
heresy had deep resonance among the Puritans, who
believed themselves to be a covenant nation of God
and a last bastion of Protestantism. Witches in New
England represented nothing less than a satanic conspiracy against God’s “city on a hill.”
Identifying these witches was a social process, a
means by which people controlled society and punished “antisocial” elements. Most accusations of
witchcraft were of a face-to-face variety and reflected
local tensions between neighbors. What is often surprising about these cases is the apparent banality of
their origins. Testimony in the 1651 trials against
Mary and Hugh Parsons of Springfield, Massachusetts, shows that untidy business transactions lay at
the root of the accusations. Hugh Parsons, a brick
maker, exchanged threatening words with neighbors
who later argued that he had bewitched them: their
children had fallen unaccountably ill, their cow’s milk
had curdled—all evidence of “bewitchment.” Other
witchcraft trials have similar quotidian origins. Unex739

Witchcraft

plained illness, crop failures, missing farm implements, or sudden deaths could easily be attributed to
a suspicious neighbor’s demonic intervention. Many
of these cases never came to trial since the accused
would often countersue for defamation. Yet the confluence of personal or communal misfortune and the
need for explanation and retribution often meant
that individuals who exhibited “antisocial” behavior
or who existed on the margins of society were identified as witches.
Most of the individuals identified as witches in
colonial America were women. Historians dispute
the numbers and gender proportions of witchcraft
accusations, but one scholar, Carol F. Karlsen, has
argued that of the 344 known people accused of
witchcraft in New England between 1620 and 1725,
267 (78 percent) were women (Karlsen, 47). Most of
these were women who, purposefully or not, refused
to accept their place in society. For example, most
accused witches in New England were middle-aged
or older women who were eligible for inheritances;
they interfered with the traditional patriarchal patterns of succession. Women accused of witchcraft in
New England usually faced a familiar litany of sins
that defined their deviance: excessive pride, sexual
promiscuity, lying, discontent, or anger. They stuck
out, in other words, in a society that prized them
chiefly as submissive Christian wives. If witchcraft
was defined as a rebellion against God, rebellion
against the gender norms and hierarchy of early
American society was equally threatening to godly
order. In times of trouble or misfortune, marginalized
or deviant women were thus among the most vulnerable to be social scapegoats and accused of being
“handmaidens of the devil” (Karlsen, 117–152).
The Salem Witchcraft Trials of 1692
These patterns can be seen writ large in the Salem
outbreaks, which lasted from late 1691 to May 1693.
This was not the first major witch-hunt in colonial
America; there had been a significant one in Hartford, Connecticut, in 1662–1665, during which at
least three people were executed. And the Salem trials, during which nineteen people (fourteen women
and five men) were hung as “witches” and hundreds
were imprisoned, were dwarfed in scale by the mas740

sive witch-hunts that had swept Europe during the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, which reputedly led to the executions of tens of thousands of
women (Levack, 1–21). Salem in the 1680s was a
troubled town. Flooded with refugees from frontier
wars with the Native American tribes allied with
France, facing a failing economy, and split by deep
class and factional fissures, the town was a tinderbox
of the kinds of social antagonisms where witchcraft
accusations could thrive (Boyer, 80–109).
The outbreak itself began in late 1691. Several
young women began to experiment with magic and
spells, and some of them, including the daughter and
niece of Samuel Parris, a local clergyman, began to
exhibit the signs of “possession.” When consulted,
physicians and clergy could only conclude that the
fits and trances that afflicted these women were evidence that they were under the influence of an “Evil
Hand.” When interrogated, the girls at first would
not name their “tormenters” but eventually gave out
three names, Sarah Good, Sarah Osborne, and
Tituba. These “witches” were arrested and presumed
guilty. Good and Osborne denied the charges, but
Tituba, a Carib Indian woman who was also Parris’s
slave, confessed. She implicated Good and Osborne
as accomplices and claimed that there were many
other witches at large and conspiring against the
community.
This confession initiated a cycle of accusations
and trials that extended far outside of Salem; even
the wife of Governor William Phips in Boston was
accused. Some people quickly came to the conclusion that the scale and reach of the accusations
meant that the outbreak was all a delusion, if perhaps a satanically inspired one. Others were not so
moderate in their opinions. Samuel Parris, for one,
argued that Salem witchcraft was nothing less than
a “War the Devil has raised amongst us.” Judicial
moderation was not an option, according to Parris,
for “If ever there were Witches, Men & Women in
Covenant with the Devil, here are Multitudes in
New-England” (Parris, 202). Other members of the
clergy were more ambiguous in their assessment of
the situation. When the judges in Salem asked New
England’s clergy for advice, Boston pastor Cotton
Mather prepared on behalf of his colleagues a doc-

Witchcraft

ument entitled “Return of Several Ministers” (15
June 1692) that gave mixed directives. On the one
hand, the document declared, the judges must be
scrupulous and exacting as they weighed the evidence. On the other hand, if witchcraft was afoot,
the prosecution against it must be speedy and vigorous. The hunt raged on until Governor Phips suspended the proceedings in late 1692; in the spring
of 1693 he pardoned everyone still in custody.
From Magic to Metaphor
The Salem trials were not the last witch prosecutions
in the American colonies; a case emerged in Colchester, Connecticut, in 1724. In general, however,
witchcraft was no longer treated as a crime. Many
scholars have argued that the growth of scientific
rationalism, beginning with the Enlightenment in
the eighteenth century, made belief in magic and the
supernatural increasingly ludicrous. While this explanation has some credence, many people continued to
believe in witchcraft after 1692, and still do.
The aftermath of the trials brought no immediate
resolution and healing to Salem or New England,
and the witch-hunt remained a source of controversy as people looked for scapegoats. Among those
most visibly selected for censure were the Puritan
ministers, especially Samuel Parris and Cotton
Mather, whose actions many believed were catalysts
for the trials. In Mather’s case, these accusations
were largely unfair, since other than his published
account of the trials, Wonders of the Invisible World
(1692), his dealings with the trials were relatively
indirect. Nevertheless, in 1700 a Boston merchant
named Robert Calef published a book, More Wonders of the Invisible World (1700), which claimed
that the Puritan clergy, and Cotton Mather in particular, had conspired to encourage the witch hysteria in order to eliminate heterodox belief and to bolster their sagging religious and cultural authority in
New England. The book was immediately labeled
libelous by the Puritan authorities, and Increase
and Cotton Mather were so angered by Calef’s
accusations that they had copies of the book publicly burned in Harvard’s college yard. Whatever
the immediate effect of the suppression of Calef’s
book, the long-term consequences to Cotton

Mather’s reputation were catastrophic. No single
figure is as closely identified with the trials as
Mather, and his memory remains as the archetypal
intolerant Puritan and superstitious witch-hunter.
In the twentieth century witchcraft and witchhunting remained alive as a powerful metaphor for
repression of many kinds: state-sponsored religious
or political persecution, or for the oppression of
women in a patriarchal society. Many contemporary
believers in witchcraft or paganism, called Wicca,
style themselves as the religious descendents of the
victims of the Salem trials, and state a continuity of
purpose between their own struggles for freedom
of religious expression and the lives of those who
died in 1692. Probably the most famous use of the
witchcraft metaphor came with the production of
Arthur Miller’s play The Crucible (1952). Declaring
that the “witch-hunt was a perverse manifestation
of the panic which set in among all classes when the
balance began to turn toward greater individual
freedom,” Miller used the Salem trials as an analogy
for the political repression of McCarthy-era America (Miller, 7). In his view, the activities of Senator
Joseph McCarthy and the House Un-American
Activities Committee represented a conspiracy
against liberty of conscience akin to the Puritan
backlash against witchcraft. Radical feminists in the
1960s, meanwhile, also employed the witchcraft
metaphor. In 1968, the “action wing” of New York
Radical Women was formed, and they chose the
name WITCH, an acronym for Women’s International Terrorist Conspiracy from Hell. The group
attacked institutions that were seen as emblems of
patriarchal power; they hexed the Chase Manhattan
bank, for example, and disrupted a bride fair at
Madison Square Gardens dressed as witches
(Purkiss, 8–9). For these women, a witch was an
emblem of female empowerment, not patriarchal
victimization.
William Van Arragon
See also: House Un-American Activities
Committee; McCarthy, Joseph.
References
Boyer, Paul, and Stephen Nissenbaum. 1974. Salem
Possessed: The Social Origins of Witchcraft.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

741

Witchcraft

Godbeer, Richard. 1992. The Devil’s Dominion:
Magic and Religion in Early New England. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Hall, David D. 1989. Worlds of Wonder, Days of
Judgment: Popular Religious Belief in Early New
England. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Karlsen, Carol F. 1987. The Devil in the Shape of a
Woman: Witchcraft in Colonial New England.
New York: W. W. Norton.

742

Levack Brian P. 1987. The Witch-Hunt in Early
Modern Europe. New York: Longman.
Miller, Arthur. 1952. The Crucible. New York:
Penguin.
Parris, Samuel. 1993. The Sermon Notebook of
Samuel Parris, 1689–1694, ed. James F. Cooper,
Jr., and Kenneth P. Minkema. Boston, MA:
Colonial Society of Massachusetts.
Purkiss, Diane. 1996. The Witch in History: Early
Modern and Twentieth-Century Representations.
New York: Routledge.

X
The X-Files
The X-Files is a long-running television series,
renowned for its atmosphere of suspicion and convoluted conspiracies. It was created by Chris
Carter, a former writer and editor (of the magazine
Surfing). It premiered on the Fox Network in the
United States in September 1993, starring David
Duchovny as Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
special agent Fox Mulder, and Gillian Anderson as
Dr. Dana Scully, his partner. Though it gained little
acclaim early in its run, this moody, visually stunning “quality TV” series went on to become first a
cult hit and then a popular success, eventually making the top twenty in the Nielsen ratings. In a selfcongratulatory but essentially accurate observation,
Carter has acknowledged that “the show’s original
spirit has become kind of the spirit of the country—
if not the world” (qtd. in Knight, 54). This spirit is
concerned with conspiracy theory, paranoia, and the
paranormal.
The X-Files generated a wide variety of spin-off
texts—including novels, official and unofficial guide
books, an official magazine, and, of course, academic examinations of the series—not to mention a
wide variety of X-Files merchandise. Hundreds of
fan websites on the Internet have been devoted to
the show, and its fans—who came to call themselves
X-Philes—are among the most obsessed in all of
popular culture. Its complex story lines, composed
of both stand-alone “monster of the week” episodes
and segments that are part of a multi-season narrative arc known as the X-Files “mythology,” have

unfolded in more than two hundred episodes over
nine series, and (to date) one feature film, X-Files:
Fight the Future (1998). Over its run, the show has
become increasingly self-referential and intertextual, offering hilarious spoofs of its own conventions and sending up other media genres. With
Duchovny’s limited participation in the 2000–2001
season (his last on the show), the series experienced
for the first time significant cast changes (Robert
Patrick as Agent John Doggett became Scully’s new
partner). By general critical consensus the series
began to decline. Many commentators even began
to question the rationale (other than economic) for
its continuance.
The degree to which The X-Files became part of
our cultural vocabulary in the 1990s and the first
years of the twenty-first century can be demonstrated by an exchange from a first-season episode
of the WB series Angel in which Kendrick, an obviously sexist male detective, hassles female detective
Kate Lockley (Elizabeth Rohm), who has come to
believe in the reality of vampires. The following dialogue ensues:
Kendrick: “Come on, Kate. Everybody knows
you’ve gone all Scully. Anytime one of these weird
cases crosses anyone’s desk you’re always there.
What’s going on with you?”
Kate: “Scully is the skeptic.”
Kendrick: “Huh?”
Kate: “Mulder is the believer. Scully is the
skeptic.”

743

The X-Files

Kendrick scratches his head: “Scully is the chick,
right?”
Kate: “Yes. But she’s not the one that wants to
believe.”

Although Kendrick does not seem to get the basic
premise, the culture at large certainly did, and to
“Scully” someone came to mean to doubt his or her
questionable ideas—especially conspiracy theories.
Mulder was open-minded about all sorts of paranormal possibilities, especially UFOs and alien abduction—had he not watched his own sister be abducted when he was twelve years old? Scully,
however, was the ever-questioning, scientifically
objective medical doctor assigned to partner with
(and rein in) Mulder in his investigation of the XFiles, those aberrant FBI cases that do not lend
themselves to normal forensic investigation.
“The Kennedy assassination, MIA’s, radiation experiments on terminal patients, Watergate, IranContra, Roswell, the Tuskegee experiments—where
will it end?” Mulder asks his informant Deep
Throat. For the critic Allison Graham, The X-Files is
“television’s fin de siècle compendium of conspiracy
theories” (Graham, 56), and is the apotheosis of U.S.
conspiratorial thinking stretching back to the 1960s.
Likening Scully and Mulder to Woodward and
Bernstein, she notes that Mulder’s sister had been
snatched by aliens while they were watching the
Watergate hearings on television. (Not surprisingly,
Chris Carter has called Watergate “the most formative event of my youth” [qtd. in Graham, 56], and
has spoken too of the strong influence of Harvard
psychologist John Mack’s controversial Abduction:
Human Encounters with Aliens.)
Driven by its “perpetual motion of suspicion”
(Knight, 28), The X-Files has contemplated much
worse than mere political conspiracy. We learn in
the mythology episodes that an international consortium (“The Syndicate”) involving mysterious,
powerful men meeting in drawing rooms in London
and New York, working in cooperation with scientists from the Axis Powers supplied through Operation Paperclip, have known since the crash of a
UFO at Roswell, New Mexico, in 1947 of a coming
alien invasion. Over the years conscientious viewers
744

have very gradually come to realize that The Syndicate has been preparing for the end, bargaining for
a delay so that they might, as a kind of peace overture to the invaders, offer them genetically engineered human-alien hybrids, purportedly as slaves
for the powerful and ancient conquerors and (in
secret) to prepare a cure, a serum, that would prevent their own colonization by the pathogenic Black
Oil. They had long ago surrendered their own loved
ones—wives, children (including Mulder’s sister)—
as hostages, in return for their own survival of the
impending “viral holocaust.” “Survival,” the Well
Manicured Man tells Mulder in the X-Files movie,
“is the ultimate ideology.”
The evil but compelling Cigarette Smoking Man
(CSM)—Mulder calls him “Cancer Man”—one of
the series’ most interesting creations, serves, it seems,
as The Syndicate’s chief enforcer, one of them but
working at their behest, though always putting his
self-interest first. In the fourth-season episode “Musings of a Cigarette-Smoking Man,” we learn (or do
we?) that his involvement in conspiracy is not limited
to covering up the coming alien invasion. CSM assassinated both JFK and Martin Luther King, fixed the
1980 United States Olympic ice hockey upset of the
Soviet Union, prevented the Buffalo Bills from ever
winning the Super Bowl, and talks regularly on the
phone with Saddam Hussein. . . . But then again we
are not certain of the validity of any of these “facts,”
which are buried two or three levels deep in the narrative, and CSM himself, it turns out, is a failed writer
of bad Robert Ludlum–ish fiction. In “José Chung’s
From Outer Space” (season 3), one of the series’ most
masterful episodes, Scully completes her narration of
the events to an author who is completing the “nonfiction science fiction” book of the title and then
admits that it “probably doesn’t have the sense of closure you want, but it has more than our other
cases”—a very self-conscious allusion to/defense of
the often-complained-about tendency of Mulder’s
and Scully’s cases (and every X-Files episode) to end
enigmatically and without full resolution.
It was probably inevitable in the climate of postmodernism that a television series so focused on
conspiracy would itself generate paranoid criticism.
Christy Burns, drawing on Horkheimer and Adorno,

XYZ Affair

suggests that this “very postmodern show” (Burns,
200) might be considered part of “a grand governmental conspiracy to ‘keep the whole thing together,’
meaning capitalism and its mass suppression”
(Burns, 213). The sealing off of the eyes of the Alien
Rebels in the series, she suggests, “pokes fun at the
fantasy that television might, like the black oil, sneak
in through our eyes and ‘infect’ us with alien cultural
influences” (Burns, 216). Although making “visible
the buried social implications of centrist politics”
(Burns, 198), the writers and producers of The XFiles, Burns proposes, have a more cynical secret
agenda in mind: “step[ping] beyond the temptation
simply to be noiresque and nihilistic, they realize
their own roles as history bringers, via television,
through which they may—wittingly or not—participate in yet another conspiracy: that of draining the
agency out of the American masses” (Burns, 199).
Adrienne McLean, too, finds the series both cause
and effect of contemporary conspiracy culture.
“Scully and Mulder cannot be joined sexually or
legally,” we are told, “because they are both literally
and figuratively alienated, penetrated, and probed to
the molecular level by omniscient and omnipotent
forces who have infiltrated, like television and, now,
computers, virtually everything in our lives.” We
remain fans of the series, she thinks, despite the anxiety it induces, because “We have to believe in the
reality of something, even if that something is the
paranoia induced by television itself” (McLean, 8).
From its inception The X-Files has given with one
hand and taken away with the other, perpetually
abandoning the viewer in a “hermeneutic limbo”
(Knight). The series has not been content to merely
“deny all knowledge”; it has, as Knight observes,
taken as its subject “the process of repeatedly discovering everything you thought you knew is wrong.”
David Lavery
See also: Federal Bureau of Investigation;
Operation Paperclip; Roswell; UFOs.
References
Burns, Christy L. 2000. “Erasure: Alienation,
Paranoia, and the Loss of Memory in The XFiles.” Camera Obscura 15: 194–219.
Graham, Allison. 1996. “‘Are You Now or Have You
Ever Been?’ Conspiracy Theory and The X-Files.”

Pp. 52–62 in Deny All Knowledge: Reading The
X-Files, ed. David Lavery, Angela Hague, and
Marla Cartwright. Syracuse: Syracuse University
Press.
Knight, Peter. 2000. Conspiracy Culture: From
Kennedy to The X-Files. London: Routledge.
Lavery, David, Angela Hague, and Marla
Cartwright, eds. 1996. Deny All Knowledge:
Reading The X-Files. Syracuse: Syracuse
University Press.
Mack, John E. 1994. Abduction: Human Encounters
with Aliens. New York: Scribner’s.
McLean, Adrienne L. 1998. “Media Effects:
Marshall McLuhan, Television Culture, and The
X-Files.” Film Quarterly 51: 2–11.

XYZ Affair
The XYZ affair is a name given to a series of events
involving French and U.S. relations during the latter half of the 1790s. In an attempt to settle disputes between the two countries arising from
French raids on U.S. shipping and outstanding
debts owed by the United States to France from the
American Revolution, newly elected President John
Adams sent a committee of three men—Charles
Cotesworth Pinkney, John Marshall, and Elbridge
Gerry—to negotiate a peaceful settlement with
France. Once there, however, the American emissaries found that the French minister of foreign
relations, Charles Maurice de Talleyrand, would not
meet with them directly. Instead he sent John Conrad Hottinguer, Pierre Bellamy, and Lucien Hauteval as his agents to negotiate what amounted to a
bribe before any formal negotiations could begin.
Rather than agree to pay almost $250,000 just to
meet with Talleyrand, the commission wrote back
to Adams describing their reception. When Adams
made these dispatches public, he replaced the
names of Talleyrand’s agents with the code names
of X, Y, and Z.
The Federalist Party, in moves largely orchestrated by Alexander Hamilton, was able to use these
events to turn a majority of U.S. citizens against the
French and the francophile Jeffersonian Republicans at home. In fact, most of the real impact of the
XYZ affair was seen in the domestic politics back in
the United States, as it provided an excellent tool for
745

XYZ Affair

the pro-British Federalists to articulate and support
their anxiety about France and cast it as a specific
threat to the United States through tales of French
intrigue and internal spies conspiring to topple the
U.S. government. The Republicans also saw the XYZ
affair through the lens of conspiracy theory as they
interpreted the actions of Adams and other Federalists in response to these events as a subterfuge to
reinforce U.S. ties, both political and economic, to
Britain. Whatever international repercussions followed from the XYZ affair, they paled in comparison
to the significance of the domestic struggles between
the Republicans and Federalists as conspiracy theory
followed counterconspiracy theory.
As the commission broke up over internal disagreement—Gerry remaining to attempt an amicable settlement, Marshall returning to the United
States to a hero’s welcome, and Pinckney taking a
sick daughter to the south of France to recuperate—
internal disagreements back in the United States
began to boil over. The Federalists demanded that
Adams declare war immediately and passed legislation readying the country for that war by setting up
a new cabinet position of the secretary of the navy
and establishing funds for a new naval force. The
Jeffersonian Republicans instead insisted on peaceful negotiation and saw the Federalist activities as
francophobic warmongering.
In order to support their side, Federalists such as
Robert Goodloe Harper from South Carolina and
Timothy Dwight from Boston promoted anti-France
political paranoia by detailing various Frenchsupported conspiracies against the United States.
Harper suggested that the French and “internal
agents” sympathetic to the Jacobin cause—read
Republicans—were fostering an uprising of southern blacks by spreading French revolutionary ideas
among slaves and that France itself would launch an
attack on the southern states from Saint Domingue
in the Caribbean. Dwight, a vehement Federalist

746

minister, on 9 May 1798 gave a sermon about a
secret offshoot of Freemasonry—the Society of the
Illuminati—that had already invaded the United
States secretly and whose agents were hiding among
the U.S. populace, waiting for a chance to attack
from within. These are only two examples of many
such conspiracy theories deployed by Federalists in
an attempt to convince Americans of the danger of
France. Their tactics worked well enough to pass the
Alien and Sedition Acts in 1798 as an attempt to regulate and control “enemies” to the United States,
both internal and external.
Republicans also attempted to point out conspiratorial threats in order to win political points for
their agenda. Republican newspaper editors such as
Benjamin Franklin Bache and Albert Gallatin used
their papers to promote conspiracy theories that
cast the Federalists in power as warmongers who
wanted to go to war with France only in order to
strengthen political and trade ties with Britain.
They even went so far as to suggest that Federalists
wanted to reunify with England and were using this
diplomatic crisis as an excuse to open the door for a
British invasion.
The political crisis brought on by the XYZ affair
was not settled until 1800 when the United States
and France signed the Treaty of Mortefontaine that
reestablished the grounds for commercial trade
between the two nations. Through the excesses of the
Alien and Sedition Acts, the Federalists finally lost
favor with the American public and Adams lost his
second bid for the White House to Thomas Jefferson.
Riley Vann
See also: Alien and Sedition Acts; Illuminati.
References
DeConde, Alexander. 1966. The Quasi-War: The
Politics and Diplomacy of the Undeclared War
with France 1797–1801. New York: Scribner’s.
Stinchcombe, William. 1980. The XYZ Affair.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

Y
Y2K
In the 1990s computer analysts began to warn that
the date change from 1999 to 2000 at the millennium
could cause some computer systems to malfunction.
This potential problem, which soon become known
as the Y2K (Year 2000) bug, attracted much media
attention and a good deal of conspiracy speculation.
Many computer operating systems designed in
the 1970s and 1980s had an internal date clock that
only used two digits, and so could only go as far as
1999. Industry analysts feared that some computers
would not recognize the year with the rollover from
1999 to 2000, and would either produce errors (mistakenly assuming the date to be 1900), or would shut
down altogether. The Y2K “bug” was therefore not a
computer virus as such, but a design flaw that hadn’t
been anticipated in the early years of software development. Governments and businesses around the
world spent huge sums of money in the years leading up to the millennium ensuring that their computer systems would be Y2K-compliant; it is estimated that the U.S. government spent $8.5 billion,
and U.S. business around $100 billion.
Conspiracy theories took one of two main forms.
On the one hand, many on the religious far right who
were already concerned about the apocalyptic connotations of the millennium warned that the global
meltdown of computer systems caused by the Y2K
bug would result in civil mayhem, in turn provoking
the U.S. government to declare martial law, and for
the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) to initiate rumored plans for a complete

erosion of citizen rights with the imposition of the socalled New World Order. One posting to the Internet newsgroup alt.conspiracy in 1997, for example,
warned, “In the year 2000, the United States Government, NATO and its armed forces will cease to
exist, as will most of the organized economy, when all
of the needed mainframe computers (and a good
many others in consequence) become useless.” The
writer went on to predict that “a third to two thirds
of the population of Europe and the United States
will die of thirst, starvation and disease, anarchy and
crime” (Wilson). These fearful scenarios tapped into
the existing apocalyptic, survivalist mentality, and a
small but committed number of Americans stockpiled food and took to their basements or their cabins in the woods in the run-up to the year 2000.
The other form that conspiracy theories took was
a cynical—some might say clear-sighted—dismissal
of the Y2K problem as a panic promoted by the
computer industry (and whipped up by the media
and a compliant government) in order to fool everyone into spending a fortune on unnecessary technical fixes. This theory was circulated a good deal on
the Internet, but was only held by a minority. However, many more people began to question the scale
of the reported problem and the cost of fixing it,
and many urban legends and rumors muddied the
waters further (one common rumor, for example,
suggested that most video recorders would not recognize the date change, but would work properly if
set to 1972, a year that corresponded in day/date to
2000, a fact that the manufacturers were apparently
747

Yalta Conference

deliberately keeping quiet; unfortunately, the warning about the malfunction, the proposed quick fix,
and the hint of a conspiracy of silence by the manufacturers were all off the mark).
According to an opinion poll reported in the Wall
Street Journal on 7 September 1999, most Americans did not believe that the Y2K bug was deliberately created (as some of the far right claimed), but
some 15 percent of Americans believed that “a person and/or company is hiding the solution to the
Y2K bug.” For those holding this belief, 60 percent
named Microsoft as the guilty party, while most of
the rest blamed the government.
In the end, of course, very little happened at the
millennium. Some power-generating companies in
the United States, for example, reported that their
computer systems had briefly malfunctioned, but
then the date was quickly reset and the systems were
restored; and there were other minor, temporary
glitches (for instance, some slot machines at a
Delaware race track shut down, but the problem
was quickly fixed [CNN]). It became apparent very
soon that there was to be no global computer systems crash, although some commentators—in the
tradition of endlessly deferred millennial warnings—pointed out that the problem would not kick
in until the return to work after the long bank holiday, and then that the true millennium would not
begin until 2001. Although the first group of conspiracy theorists outlined above had little to say in
the wake of the nonevents of 1 January 2000, some
of the second group continued to question whether
the threat had been unnecessarily exaggerated. The
computer industry and the U.S. government, however, insisted that disaster had been avoided only
because the vast sums of money had been well spent
on curing the problem in advance. As the sociologist
Anthony Giddens has argued, in issuing warnings
about potential disaster scenarios (the AIDS epidemic and mad cow disease are the obvious examples) the authorities are in a no-win situation: either
they downplay the potential danger, but then if
something bad does happen they will be accused of
a cover-up; or they give full credence to the scientific predictions, but, because people change their
behavior accordingly and the disaster is averted,
748

they are vulnerable to accusations that the problem
was deliberately exaggerated in the first place.
Peter Knight
See also: Apocalypticism; Internet; Militias;
Millenarianism; New World Order.
References
CNN. 2000. “Preparation Pays Off; World Reports
Only Tiny Y2K Glitches.” 1 January.
http://www.cnn.com/2000/TECH/computing/01/0
1/y2k.weekend.wrap/.
Giddens, Anthony. The Consequences of Modernity.
1990. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
McCullagh, Declan. 1999. “Y2K Conspiracy Goes
Mainstream.” http://www.wired.com/news/
politics/0,1283,20751,00.html.
Wilson, Coyt Taylor. 1997. Posting to alt.conspiracy
31 May. Available at: http://www.conspiracy-net.
com/archives/articles/conspiracy/militia/
CNCe0030.txt.
Websites
National Y2K Clearing House: http://www.y2k.gov/.
U.S. Senate, Y2K Special Committee: http://www.
senate.gov/~y2k/.

Yalta Conference
On 4–11 February 1945, Franklin Roosevelt, Winston Churchill, and Joseph Stalin convened secretly
at the Black Sea resort of Yalta in what proved to be
the last meeting of the “Big Three” of World War II.
With Nazi Germany collapsing, the Yalta conference focused upon postwar reconstruction plans for
Europe, the formation of a new international organization, and the military defeat of Japan. Shrouded
in military secrecy and driven by the imperative of
getting the Soviet Union to enter the war against
Japan, the Yalta agreements generated only mild
controversy in 1945. However, as the cold war
intensified and the Truman administration embraced the policy of containment, conservative critics in the Republican Party began to brand Yalta as
the appeasement of communism, suggesting that
Roosevelt, under the influence of advisers such as
Alger Hiss who were positively disposed toward
communism and the Soviet Union, had conceded
too much to Stalin. The 1952 Republican platform
called for the repudiation of “all commitments contained in secret understandings such as those of

Yalta Conference

Crimean Conference—Prime Minister Winston Churchill, President Franklin D. Roosevelt, and Marshal Joseph Stalin at
the palace in Yalta, where the Big Three met. (U.S. Signal Corps photo) (Library of Congress)

Yalta which aid Communist enslavements.” Rather
than a diplomatic agreement, Yalta was in the
eyes of anticommunists such as Senator Joseph
McCarthy evidence of the Communist conspiracy
to infiltrate the U.S. government.
The Yalta accords called for the Soviet Union to
attack Japan within three months after the defeat of
Germany. Stalin also agreed to self-determination for
the areas of Eastern Europe, such as Poland, which
the Soviet army had already “liberated.” Chiang Kaishek was recognized as the leader of China in the
struggle against Japan, but the Soviet Union was
granted joint control of China’s Manchurian railroads, providing the Soviets a voice in the postwar
governance of Korea and Manchuria. In exchange
for Stalin’s pledge to enter the war against Japan, the
Soviets were promised the southern half of Sakhalin
Island, lost in the Russo-Japanese War of 1905, and
Japan’s Kurile Islands. The “Big Three” also committed their nations to the formation of the United
Nations, reserving veto powers for themselves as permanent members of the Security Council.

An ailing and tired Roosevelt returned to the
United States and remained seated while addressing
Congress, arguing that the agreements made with
the Soviets deserved the support of the nation. Initially, Yalta appeared to enjoy bipartisan support, and
influential publications such as Time announced that
no U.S. citizen could claim that his nation’s interests
had been “sold down the river.” Perhaps the adroit
Roosevelt might have maintained the initial enthusiasm, but, following his death from a stroke on 12
April 1945, international relations between the
United States and Soviet Union rapidly deteriorated.
Stalin and President Harry Truman clashed at
Potsdam in July 1945, while the successful testing of
the atomic bomb in New Mexico rendered unnecessary any Soviet participation in an invasion of Japan.
As the cold war intensified in the late 1940s, critics of
the Yalta conference conveniently forgot military
estimates of heavy casualties that would result from
an invasion of the Japanese home islands. Republicans, seeking to attract votes from those of Eastern
European ancestry, seized upon Yalta as a betrayal of
749

Yellow Journalism

Poland by the Roosevelt and Truman administrations. The emergence of China as a Communist state
in 1949 led to assertions that Yalta had betrayed Chinese democracy. Yalta critics also concentrated upon
the conviction of Alger Hiss for perjury following the
1948 appearance by Whittaker Chambers before the
House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC).
Chambers accused Hiss, who had been an adviser to
Secretary of State Edward Stettinius, Jr., at Yalta, of
engaging in espionage for the Soviet Union. Alleging
treason, Senator McCarthy and his supporters
focused upon how Hiss influenced a “physically tired
and mentally sick Roosevelt.”
Allegations of Democratic “softness” on communism played a role in the election of a Republican
Congress and president in 1952. Once in power, the
Republican administration of Dwight Eisenhower
embraced containment rather than the “rollback” of
communism. The more extreme voices of Republican dissent were marginalized in March 1955 with
publication of the Yalta papers, demonstrating that
no new secret agreements existed and documenting
that Hiss played only a minor role at the Crimean
conference. It was difficult to charge a Republican
administration with a “whitewash” report, and the
Senate censure of Senator McCarthy and negotiations between the Soviets and United States further
undermined the conspiracy interpretations of the
Yalta accords.
While the fervor of Yalta as a partisan issue declined after 1955, allegations of Communist conspiracy, fueled by misconceptions of the Yalta agreement, continued to be a mainstay of U.S. politics into
the 1980s.
Ron Briley
See also: Anticommunism; Atomic Secrets; Hiss,
Alger; House Un-American Activities Committee;
McCarthy, Joseph; Roosevelt, Franklin Delano
References
Leffler, Melvyn P. 1992. A Preponderance of Power:
National Security, the Truman Administration
and the Cold War. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Theoharis, Athan G. 1970. The Yalta Myths: An
Issue in U.S. Politics, 1945–1955. Columbia:
University of Missouri Press.

750

Weinstein, Allen. 1978. Perjury: The Hiss–Chambers
Case. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Yergin, Daniel. 1977. Shattered Peace: The Origins
of the Cold War. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.

Yellow Journalism
A style of sensationalist newspaper writing that
emerged in the late nineteenth century, “yellow
journalism” has been accused, at best, of conspiracyminded scaremongering and, at worst, of actively
fabricating stories and conspiring behind the scenes
to bring about historical events. Known by its proponents as “the journalism that acts” (Milton, xiii), it
is a style of biased reporting designed to inspire specific opinions of its readership. This style makes use
of multicolumn headlines, a wide variety of sensational subject matter, frequent, and some say excessive, use of illustrations of all sorts, intriguing and
novel layouts, the use of anonymous sources, and a
focus on self-promotion.
The term comes from the newspaper publicity
wars of the late 1800s, when publisher William
Randolph Hearst hired artist R. F. Outcault away
from the New York World to work for his newspaper, the New York Journal. Hearst was interested in
presenting one of Outcault’s newest creations, a
comic strip named Hogan’s Alley. The strip featured what was to be Outcault’s most famous creation, a small Chinese boy who wore a giant shirt
that reached from his neck to his toes. When color
became available, this boy’s shirt was colored yellow, and the strip became colloquially known as
“The Yellow Kid.” Following a fight over the character and the profits his immense readership would
bring, eventually both papers won the right to print
comics featuring him. The use of the color yellow, a
novelty at the time, came to symbolize a new movement in journalism, namely a focus upon style and
bold effects that often played fast and loose with the
truth to attract readers.
The most famous example of yellow journalism is
an alleged cable sent by Hearst. Reporter Richard
Harding Davis and artist Frederic Remington were

Yellow Journalism

Joseph Pulitzer and William Randolph Hearst, full-length, dressed as the Yellow Kid, each pushing against opposite sides
of a pillar of wooden blocks that spells WAR. (Library of Congress)

sent by Hearst to Cuba to report on conditions
there in the winter of 1896–1897. The expected
revolution against the ruling colonial government of
Spain was not visible in Havana, and Remington is
said to have told Hearst, “Everything is quiet. There
is no trouble here. There will be no war. I wish to
return.” In reply, Hearst is said to have ordered,
“Please remain. You furnish the pictures, and I’ll
furnish the war.” Although Hearst denied the story,
and no evidence of the telegrams has ever been
found, the re-creation of the incident within Orson
Welles’s epic Citizen Kane has only lent credence to
the oft-told tale. It is entirely possible, however, that
the story that best defined the term “yellow journalism” is also the finest example of the form, as
James Creelman, who broke the story, did little to
offer any evidence or proof of his claims concerning
Hearst, and in decrying the lack of responsible

reporting of the Spanish-American War may have
used the very techniques he was attempting to
describe to make his point.
It is important to note, however, that Creelman
was known to exaggerate in his stories, and had in
fact previously been investigated by the U.S. minister to Japan, Edwin Dun, for a report to the U.S.
State Department concerning his work. Conspiracies were often a feature within his prose, involving
individuals at the highest level of the U.S. government. Hearst, on the other hand, only argued
against the rumor on occasion, and may have preferred the circulation of the telegram story, which he
could offer arguments against, as a defense against
inquiry into his involvement in events leading up to
the bombing of the USS Maine. If Hearst had truly
been involved in either of these attacks, it would be
in his best interest to encourage investigation into

751

Yippies

events, such as the purported telegraphic exchange,
that he could more easily deny.
Today the term “yellow journalism” is normally
used to refer to a lack of ethical behavior on the part
of journalists and commentators, whether it is by
manufacturing sources and stories, or by tricking
their sources into revealing far more of a story than
they intended to in the first place.
Solomon Davidoff
See also: Hearst, William Randolph; USS Maine.
References
Blackbeard, Bill. 1989. “Yellow Kid.” World
Encyclopedia of Comics, ed. Maurice Horn.
Philadelphia: Chelsea House.
Campbell, Joseph W. 2001. Yellow Journalism:
Puncturing the Myths, Defining the Legacies.
Westport, CT: Praeger.
Milton, Joyce. 1989. The Yellow Kids: Foreign
Correspondents in the Heyday of Yellow
Journalism. New York: Harper and Row.

Yippies
On 31 December 1967, at a party hosted by Abbie
and Anita Hoffman and attended by Jerry Rubin,
Nancy Kurshan, and Paul Krassner, the movement
known as Yippie!—the Youth International Party
(YIP)—was born. Guided by Hoffman and Rubin,
the clown-princes of “the Movement” during the
Vietnam era, the Yippies attempted, through myth,
media savvy, and guerrilla theater to bind the hippie
counterculture and the politicized New Left into a
powerful youth movement capable of creating an
alternative U.S. society. By building on their earlier
media attention-grabbing protest events, such as the
August 1967 episode of money throwing and burning at the New York Stock Exchange and the October 1967 National Mobilization to End the War in
Vietnam march on the Pentagon where the duo took
part in an attempted exorcism and levitation of the
building, Hoffman and Rubin attempted to use the
popular press to publicize YIP and garner support
for their ideological views. The Yippies were one of
a number of late 1960s countercultural movements
who not only viewed the establishment as amount752

ing to a conspiracy, but also self-consciously styled
themselves as a counterconspiracy.
The Yippies’ first major media event took place on
27 February 1968, when members of the group
“raided” the campus of the State University of New
York (SUNY)–Stoney Brook mimicking a recent oncampus drug-bust. Following this action, on 22
March 1968, the Youth International Party held a
“Yip-In” at New York City’s Grand Central Station.
Six thousand potential Yippies congregated amidst
incense and balloons—so did officers of the New
York Police Department. When a demonstrator
removed the hands from a large clock, the police
attacked, making fifty arrests and throwing one
demonstrator through a plate glass door. This melee,
however, was only a prelude to the major summer
event the Yippies had planned—the Festival of Life.
Coinciding with the August 1968 Democratic
National Convention (DNC), the Yippie Festival of
Life sought to bring tens of thousands of people to
Chicago to launch a demonstration that would end
the war in Vietnam and usher in a new, free society.
The Yippies aimed to counterpose what they saw as
the political “convention of death,” and they planned
to include a huge rock-folk festival, numerous theater performances, educational workshops, and a
“constitutional convention.” Chicago Mayor Richard
Daley, who had promised to bring local, state, and
federal powers to bear against anyone attempting to
disrupt the convention, thwarted YIP efforts at
achieving the full aims of the festival. Instead, Daley’s
tactics forced confrontations between his police
force and those who had come to protest the DNC.
Despite repressive government tactics, the Yippies
succeeded in nominating a pig, “Pigasus,” for president, providing a brief rock concert, causing an LSD
scare by threatening to lace the Chicago water supply with the drug, and providing movement workshops on guerrilla theater and protest maneuvers.
The events surrounding the convention drew to a climax when, on the night of 29 August, a “police riot”
broke out when Daley’s lawmen violently assaulted
protesters, journalists, and bystanders alike. Hoffman and Rubin would later be indicted on conspiracy charges, for their activities during the convention, as part of the Chicago 7 trial.

Yippies

The Yippies continued to garner media attention
within and outside the Movement for the remainder of the 1960s and into the 1970s. At the 1972
Democratic National Convention, held in Miami
Beach, Florida, the younger faction of the Youth
International Party, the “Zippies” (or Zeitgeist
International Party) broke with the older YIP members. Hoffman and Rubin, who conditionally supported the peace platform of Democratic presidential candidate George McGovern, were seen as
establishment “sell-outs” by the younger YIP faction, whereas the older Yippies objected to the Zippies’ outrageous street comedy, which they viewed
as overly cruel satire.
As the power and momentum of the Movement
declined, so did the visibility of the Yippies. Beginning in the 1970s, YIP published the Yipster Times
(later renamed Overthrow) and the Youth International Party Line or YIPL (later known as TAP
[Technological American Party or Technological
Assistance Program]) magazine. By the 1980s, the
Yippies were best known for their “smoke-ins”
(which developed into annual “pot parades” pro-

moting the legalization of marijuana), crank phone
call wars with Yippie enemies, and maintenance of
their protest and demonstration staging point, the
Yippie loft—an apartment in New York City’s East
Village that has served as the group’s headquarters
since 1973.
Nicholas Turse
See also: Chicago 7; Weathermen.
References
Chepesiuk, Ron. 1995. “Anita Hoffman.” Pp.
169–181 in Sixties Radicals, Then and Now, ed.
Ron Chepesiuk. Jefferson, NC: McFarland and
Co.
Free [Abbie Hoffman]. 1968. Revolution for the Hell
of It. New York: Dial Press.
Hoffman, Abbie. 1980. Soon to Be a Major Motion
Picture. New York: Perigree Books.
Moynihan, Colin. 2001. “Yippie Central.” New York
Today (newyorktoday.com), 6 August.
Peck, Abe. [1985] 1991. Uncovering the Sixties: The
Life and Times of the Underground Press. New
York: Citadel Press.
Rubin, Jerry. 1970. Do It! Scenarios of the
Revolution. New York: Simon and Schuster.

753

Z
Zenger, John Peter
John Zenger (1680–1746), a German-born printer
working in New York City, found himself at the center of a political brawl in 1732 by printing a letter
from New York Supreme Court chief justice Lewis
Morris. The letter was a minority opinion in the case
of Governor William Cosby against respected and
elderly statesman Rip Van Dam, who had acted as
governor for almost a year awaiting Cosby’s arrival
from England to begin his term. Cosby insisted on
receiving his salary for that time, and Van Dam
refused. Since no court in New York would yield the
decision Cosby wanted, he constructed a “Court of
Exchequer” from the colony’s Supreme Court, and
instructed it to decide his case without a jury.
Although two of the judges found for Cosby, under
intense pressure, the third, Lewis Morris, dissented
and, after being replaced by Cosby, circulated his
opinion in the form of a pamphlet printed by Zenger.
Although Zenger knew that printers were held
responsible for their work, his newspaper, the New
York Weekly Journal, continued to publish songs,
cartoons, and articles critical of Cosby and his activities, including taking money from the New York
Assembly and violating the colony’s laws by attempting to rig an election for assemblymen against Lewis
Morris. A rival paper, the New York Gazette, controlled by Cosby’s supporter, Francis Harison,
rebutted these charges as libelous and untrue. Cosby
pressured the Supreme Court to get an indictment
against Zenger as a libeler, but two grand juries, noting that Zenger had not written the material, refused

to bring charges. Frustrated, the governor entered
into a conspiracy to bring down Zenger, ordering a
Supreme Court bench warrant issued on information
filed by his attorney general, Richard Bradley.
Unable to pay the £800 bail, Zenger remained under
arrest for eight months in the Old City Jail as an
object of much sympathy and support, much of it
stirred by his wife’s continuing publication of the
Journal.
The case finally came to trial in August 1735. The
governor intended to have the case tried by his
handpicked Supreme Court justices Delancey and
Philipps alone, but Zenger’s lawyers objected successfully. Cosby and his conspirators then attempted
to select a jury pool composed of Cosby’s employees
and supporters, but Judge Delancey, horrified at this
transparent manipulation of the system, refused to
comply. Cosby then attempted to disbar Zenger’s
attorneys, but was thwarted when the famous
Philadelphia lawyer Andrew Hamilton agreed to act
on Zenger’s behalf. Prosecuted by Attorney General
Bradley, who accused Zenger of seditious libel
against Governor Cosby, the printer adopted a
unique defense at Hamilton’s insistence: Zenger
would not contest the fact that he printed the materials, but would claim that it could not be libel
because they were true.
Bradley pointed out that the libel law of New York
did not recognize truth as a defense against a charge
of libel, but Hamilton countered with the argument
that the law ought to allow the complaints of men
who had been oppressed or wronged to be aired pub755

Zimmermann Telegram

licly. Although this had no legal support in the colony,
Hamilton could turn to the jury and ask for nullification of an unjust statute. In his closing remarks,
Hamilton spoke not of Zenger as an individual, but as
the representative of the press, and asked them to
vote in favor of a free press unrestricted by arbitrary
government. Delancey instructed the jury to find
Zenger guilty, which, under the law, he was, but they
returned with a “not guilty” verdict.
This single nullification did not change New York
law, but it sent a clear message that the people of
the colony, and, by extension, those of the other
British colonies in the Americas, would not tolerate
unjust prosecutions by corrupt government, and
that they valued an independent press in which to
circulate their views. Despite the powerful conspiracy brought to bear by Cosby, and his misuse of the
judicial and electoral system, Zenger and his case
triumphed to become a bulwark against other conspiracies and restrictions on journalism.
Margaret Sankey
References
Latham, Frank Brown. 1970. The Trial of John Peter
Zenger, August 1735; an Early Fight for America’s
Freedom of the Press. New York: Watts.
Rutherfurd, Livingston. 1970. John Peter Zenger:
His Press, His Trial, and a Bibliography of Zenger
Imprints. New York: Arno.

Zimmermann Telegram
In the winter of 1916–1917 the United States was
still officially neutral in Europe’s Great War, but
the situation was changing. The German foreign
minister, Arthur Zimmermann, sent a telegram
effectively proposing an alliance with Mexico in
case the United States entered World War I. The
turning over of the Zimmermann telegram to the
U.S. government by the British government in
February dramatically changed the course of
World War I. The telegram would be one of the last
factors leading the United States to enter the war.
Since its release to the U.S. government the document has on occasion been the subject of questions
as to how it came into the British government’s
possession, and why officials took so long after
receiving it to turn it over to the United States. The
756

popular suspicion is that the Zimmermann telegram
was deliberately forged, and was part of a conspiracy
to force the United States to enter the war.
Barbara Tuchman laid out what has become the
traditional interpretation in her book on the subject. German concerns over the ability to maintain
the neutral status of the United States and a belief
that Britain would be forced out of the war quickly
if restrictions were lifted on its submarine commanders’ ability to sink ships led the German imperial government to decide to take a gamble. It chose
to return to unrestricted submarine warfare from 1
February 1917, even though it might bring the
United States into the war. In order to deal with the
potential U.S. involvement in the war the German
government convinced itself that potential German
allies to the south and west could divert U.S. attention from the continent. The idea would be to convince Mexico, and hopefully Japan, to go to war
with the United States and keep it occupied in its
own backyard.
The history of U.S.–Mexican relations at the time
gave the Germans reason to hope. In 1836 Texas
gained its independence from Mexico and was then
annexed by the United States in 1845. Then in 1848
the United States gained possession of California
and the western United States south of Oregon and
west of Texas after defeating Mexico in the Mexican
American War (1846–1848). More recently the
United States had sent troops into Mexico in 1914
to occupy Vera Cruz and then again in 1916 to deal
with bandits.
The German foreign minister, Arthur Zimmermann, sent a telegram on 16 January 1917 to the
German ambassador to the United States for forwarding to the German ambassador in Mexico. It
explained the German position; although the message espoused a German desire to maintain U.S.
neutrality during the Great War, if this failed it proposed as an alternative that Mexico assault the
United States with German assistance. In exchange
for Mexican cooperation they would receive German financial assistance and the return of territories of the American southwest that had been lost:
“Mexico is to re-conquer the lost territory in Texas,
New Mexico, and Arizona” (Tuchman, 146).

Zimmermann Telegram

The telegram was intercepted by the British and
decoded over the next few weeks. When the document was finished the British had a tool to use to
convince the United States of its need to enter the
war, but they first had to hide the evidence of how
they came into possession of the document, causing
a delay in its transmission to the U.S. government.
The British need for security of their code-breaking
operations led to a desire to find a second source;
that source was a copy of the telegram sent from
Washington to Mexico, which contained subtle but
significant differences from the one to Washington
the British were already working on. On 24 February Walter Page, the U.S. ambassador to the United
Kingdom, telegraphed the contents of the telegram
to Washington. He also sent along an explanation of
the British delay in turning over the information to
the United States, namely their desire to protect
their sources (Hendrick, 334). The document
became public on 1 March, after which a public
uproar ensued with some Americans claiming the
document was a fraud. They were convinced that
the Allies, and particularly the British government,
lied to the United States in order to convince the
Americans to support them during the Great War.
This was a response to a traditional U.S. concern
about the British dating back to the American Revolution, an idea that would after World War I be
replaced by the “special relationship.” The popular
suspicion was that the telegram was not sent by the
Germans but was the creation of British intelligence
who used it to convince Americans of the immediate
German threat to the United States. This theory
withered away quickly on 2 March when Zimmermann admitted having sent the telegram. Even with
this, America’s entrance into the war was not immediate, as Wilson did not ask Congress for a declaration of war against Germany until 2 April and it was
not passed by Congress until 6 April.
More recently it has been proposed that the Zimmermann telegram and the Balfour declaration were
tied together. In a letter of 2 November 1917 British
Foreign Secretary Arthur Balfour stated the government’s support for the establishment of a “national
home for the Jewish people” in Palestine; this has
since come to be known as the Balfour declaration.

John Cornelius has argued that the declaration was
the price for the un-encoded text of the Zimmermann telegram. He argued that it was unlikely that
the British were capable of breaking the German
diplomatic code (or else the Germans would not
have used it), and thus the information about the
contents must have come from another source. He
argued that Zionists in Germany worked with Zionists in Britain to make a deal in which the British
would get the text of the telegram in exchange for the
acknowledgment of their rights in Palestine. This
theory assumes that since the Germans used a code
they believed unbroken, it must have been unbroken, and thus the British needed help from German
Zionists to get the contents of the telegram. British
success in breaking the German Enigma code in
World War II suggests the weakness of this logic. It
is also based on a timetable of events that though
interwoven, does not show any direct connection
between the actions.
The ultimate impact of the Zimmermann
telegram is unknown. As Tuchman noted, it was
likely that at some point Germany would push the
United States into the war. And while the theory of
a relationship between the Zimmermann telegram
and the Balfour declaration is potentially interesting for its impact in the Middle East, the theory
does not answer as many of the questions about
either document as the proponents believe.
Donald E. Heidenreich, Jr.
References
Balfour, Arthur. 1917. “Balfour Declaration, 2
November 1917.” http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/
avalon/mideast/balfour.htm.
Cornelius, John. 1997. “The Balfour Declaration and
the Zimmermann Note.” Washington Report on
Middle East Affairs. http://www.washingtonreport.org/backissues/0897/9708018.html.
Friedman, William F,. and Charles J. Mendelsohn.
1976. The Zimmermann Telegram of January 16,
1917, and Its Cryptographic Background. Laguna
Hills, CA: Aegean Park Press.
Hendrick, Burton J. 1925. The Life and Letters of
Walter H. Page. Vol. 3. Garden City, NY:
Doubleday, Page and Company.
Tuchman, Barbara. 1985. The Zimmermann
Telegram. New York: Ballantine Books.

757

ZOG

ZOG
ZOG, an acronym for Zionist Occupied Government, is a term used by many on the survivalist and
racist Right to refer to the United States government or its shadow government, which they believe
is secretly controlled by a rich and powerful group of
international Jews intent on establishing a one-world
government. The phrase itself derives from The
Turner Diaries, a 1978 novel written by William L.
Pierce under the pseudonym Andrew MacDonald.
The novel tells the story of white Christian patriots
who start a guerrilla war against the forces of ZOG
after all citizens are stripped of their right to own
firearms. In their war against ZOG, white Americans
assassinate government officials, blow up federal
buildings, uproot and murder blacks and other
minorities, and finally launch a nuclear strike that
destroys Israel. Although for some, ZOG simply
refers to a conservative antigovernment attitude and
a suspicion of globalism, the term is more often associated with a panoply of extreme right-wing militias
like the Montana Freemen, white supremacist
groups like the Posse Comitatus, and apocalyptic
Christians like Randy Weaver, as a more specific
name for what they believe is an international Jewish conspiracy to undermine U.S. sovereignty and

758

true Christianity. These groups believe that ZOG
controls the media, the major international financial
institutions, schools, and liberal politicians who promote affirmative-action policies, immigration, multiculturalism, gun control, abortion, and the general
erosion of liberty. Further evidence of a ZOG conspiracy is found in U.S. foreign policy toward Israel,
its participation in the United Nations and other
international organizations, and the apparent power
of labor unions. Some who promote the ZOG conspiracy believe that UN troops are training and
gathering in various locations around the country,
preparing to disarm patriotic citizens and impose
martial law. The term also often connotes a Christian apocalypticism that links the global Jewish conspiracy to biblical prophecies of the Last Days, when
the Antichrist institutes one-world governance just
before the final battle of Armageddon.
Jeff Insko
See also: Militias; One-World Government, Posse
Comitatus; Ruby Ridge; Pierce, William L.
References
Coates, James. 1987. Armed and Dangerous: The
Rise of the Survivalist Right. New York: Hill and
Wang.
Website
Jew Watch: http://www.jewwatch.com.

Primary Source Documents
Introduction
This final section of the encyclopedia contains
approximately 100 extracts from primary sources
that illustrate the history of conspiracies and conspiracy theories in the United States. They are
arranged chronologically by date of composition
(with a few exceptions where later reflections on
particular events are located with other items
about those events). Each has a brief headnote that
explains the context of the piece. The selection is
deliberately broad, in order to reflect the wide
range of topics covered by this encyclopedia (but
there is not enough space to cover every entry).
The selection includes documents that are the
“smoking gun” of actual conspiracies, and also
accounts of proven conspiracy and conspiratorial
rebellion. It also includes the whole gamut of conspiracy speculation and demonological rhetoric,
from President Washington’s warnings about a
“regular, systematic plan” to deprive America of its
liberties to recent writings on the Internet about
the threat of secret plans for a New World Order.
The inclusion of a particular item is not meant to
signal that it is either necessarily true or necessarily false.
This selection is intended as a supplement to
The Fear of Conspiracy: Images of Un-American
Subversion from the Revolution to the Present
(1971), David Brion Davis’s seminal annotated collection of conspiracy theory extracts. The first way
that the present selection supplements Davis’s volume is that it endeavors to bring the story of con-

spiracies and conspiracy theories up to date. Much
has happened since 1971 (not least defining events
like Watergate), and there has been an explosion in
the popularity of conspiracy theories. The choice of
items here is intended to reflect that resurgence in
conspiracy thinking, and is weighted slightly more
toward the present to complement Davis’s more
historical choice of materials.
In addition to covering both conspiracies and
conspiracy theories, the materials include both
explicitly political items (such as the proceedings of
the anti-Masonic conventions of the 1830s) and (in
contrast to Davis’s volume) more popular musings
from everyday culture that are not immediately
political (such as accounts of alien abduction and
mind-control experiments). This choice also means
that although some of the items are by some of the
most famous commentators of their time (for
example, Jedidiah Morse’s denouncement of the
Illuminati in the 1790s), many other items are from
much lesser known writers. Indeed, many of the
more recent items are taken from the Internet, the
current home of self-publishing, which also means
that they are usually far more ephemeral than the
older, more established print items. However,
given that the Internet has become such an important outlet for popular politics in general and conspiracy theory in particular, and given that so much
of it disappears so fast, it is worth beginning to
record some of the sheer profusion so as to make
possible an ongoing history of the “paranoid style”
in U.S. culture and politics.
759

Cotton Mather, Wonders of the Invisible World

Every reasonable effort has been made to contact
the copyright holders of items still in copyright.
Please contact the publisher with any omissions
and errors, and these will be corrected in subsequent editions.
Cotton Mather, Wonders of the
Invisible World (1692)
The Salem witch trials of 1692 were the largest and
most famous proceedings of their kind in the American colonies. In all, hundreds of people were
imprisoned, several people died in jail or under
interrogation, and nineteen “witches” were hanged.
Cotton Mather, a Boston Puritan pastor, saw the
scope of the outbreak as evidence of a wider satanic
conspiracy against Puritan New England itself.
Doubtless, the Thoughts of many will receive a
great Scandal against New-England, from the
Number of Persons that have been Accused, or
Suspected for Witchcraft, in this Country: But it
were easy to offer many things, that may Answer
and Abate the Scandal. If the Holy God should
any where permit the Devils to hook two or three
wicked Scholars into Witchcraft, and then by their
Assistance to Range with their Poisonous
Insinuation among Ignorant, Envious,
Discontented People, till they have cunningly
decoy’d them into some sudden Act whereby the
Toils of Hell shall be perhaps inextricably cast
over them: what Country in the world would not
afford Witches, numerous to a Prodigy?
Accordingly, the Kingdoms of Sweden, Denmark,
Scotland, yes and England itself, as well as the
Province of New-England, have had their Storms
of Witchcrafts breaking upon them, which have
made most Lamentable Devastations: which also I
wish may be The Last. And it is not uneasy to be
imagined, That God has not brought out all the
Witchcrafts in many other Lands with such a
speedy, dreadful, destroying jealousy, as burns
forth upon such High Treasons, committed here
in A Land of Uprightness: Transgressors may
more quickly here than elsewhere become a Prey
to the vengeance of Him, Who has Eyes like a
760

Flame of Fire, and, who walks in the midst of the
Golden Candlesticks. [ . . .]
But besides all this, give me leave to add, it is
to be hoped, That among the Persons represented
by the Spectres which now afflict our Neighbours,
there will be found some that never explicitly
contracted with any of the Evil Angels. The
Witches have not only intimated, but some of
them acknowledge, That they have plotted the
Representations. [ . . .]
But such is the descent of the Devil at this day
upon our selves, that I may truly tell you, The
Walls of the whole World are broken down! The
usual Walls of defence about mankind have such a
Gap made in them, that the very Devils are broke
in upon us, to seduce the Souls, torment the
Bodies, sully the Credits, and consume the Estates
of our Neighbours, with Impressions both as real
and as furious, as if the Invisible World were
becoming Incarnate, on purpose for the vexing of
us. And what use ought now to be made of so
tremendous a dispensation? We are engaged in a
Fast this day; but shall we try to fetch Meat out of
the Eater, and make the Lion to afford some
Hony for our Souls?
That the Devil is come down unto us with great
Wrath, we find, we feel, we now deplore. In many
ways, for many years hath the Devil been assaying
to Extirpate the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus here.
[ . . .] But now there is a more than ordinary
affliction, with which the Devil is Galling of us:
and such an one as indeed Unparallelable. The
things confessed by Witches, and the things
endured by Others, laid together, amount unto this
account of our Affliction. The Devil, Exhibiting
himself ordinarily as a small Black man, has
decoy’d a fearful knot of proud forward, ignorant,
envious and malicious creatures, to lift themselves
in his horrid Service, by entring their Names in a
Book by him tendred unto them. These Witches,
who of above a Score have now Confessed, and
shown their Deeds, and some are now tormented
by the Devils, for Confessing, have met in Hellish
Randezvouzes, wherein the Confessors do say,
they have had their diabolical Sacraments,
imitating the Baptism and the Supper of our Lord.

Supreme Court of Judicature, New York City, “New York Conspiracy”

In these hellish meetings, these Monsters have
associated themselves to do no less a thing than,
To destroy the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ,
in these parts of the World; and in order hereunto,
First they each of them, have their Spectres, or
Devils, commission’d by them, & representing of
them, to be the Engines of their Malice.
Source
Mather, Cotton. 1692. Wonders of the Invisible
World. Boston: N.p.

Robert Hunter, “Letter to the Lords of the
Trade” (23 June 1712)
In this letter to the Lords of Trade, Robert Hunter,
the royal governor of New York and New Jersey
from 1710 to 1719, reports on the conspiratorial
slave revolt in New York that had taken place in
1712.
I must now give Your Lordships an account of a
bloody conspiracy of some of the slaves of this
Place, to destroy as many of the inhabitants as they
could. It was put in execution in this manner,
when they had resolved to revenge themselves, for
some hard usage they apprehended to have
received from their Masters (for I can find no
other cause) they agreed to meet in the orchard of
Mr. Crook in the middle of the town, some
provided with fire arms, some with swords and
others with knives and hatchets. This was the sixth
day of April, the time of meeting was about twelve
or one o’clock in the night, when about three and
twenty of them were got together. One coffee and
negroe slave to one Vantilburgh set fire to an out
house of his masters, and then repairing to his
place where the rest were, they all sallyed out
together with their arms and marched to the fire.
By this time, the noise of the fire spreading
through the town, the people began to flock to it.
Upon the approach of several, the slaves fired and
killed them. The noise of the guns gave the alarm,
and some escaping, their shot soon published the
cause of the fire, which was the reason that not
above nine Christians were killed, and about five
or six wounded.

Upon the first notice, which was very soon after
the mischief was begun, I order’d a detachment
from the fort under a proper officer to march
against them, but the slaves made their retreat
into the woods, by the favour of the night. Having
ordered sentries the next day in the most proper
places on the Island [Manhattan] to prevent their
escape, I caused the day following, the militia of
this town and of the county of West Chester to
drive [to] the Island, and by this means and strict
searches in the town, we found all that put the
design in execution.
Six of these having first laid violent hands upon
themselves, the rest were forthwith brought to
their tryal before the Justices of this place, who
are authorized by Act of Assembly to hold a court
in such cases. In that court were 27 condemned,
whereof 21 were executed, one being a woman
with child, her execution by that means
suspended. Some were burnt, others hanged, one
broke on the wheel, and one hung alive in chains
in the town, so that there has been the most
exemplary punishment inflicted that could be
possibly thought of.
Source
O’Callaghan, E. B., ed. 1853–1858. Documents
Relative to the Colonial History of the State of New
York. Weed, Parsons, and Co.

Supreme Court of Judicature, New York City,
“New York Conspiracy” (1741)
The following extract is taken from the grand jury
investigation into the acts of arson and public violence in New York in 1741. Mr. Justice Philipse
promised to get to the bottom of “the premeditated
malice and wicked pursuits of evil and designing
persons,” and harbored the suspicion that blacks
might have been involved.
Mr. Justice Philipse gave the charge to the
grand jury, as follows:
Gentlemen of the grand jury,
[ . . .] The many frights and terrors which the
good people of this city have of late been put into,
761

Francis Parkman, The Conspiracy of Pontiac

by repeated and unusual fires, and burning of
houses, give us too much room to suspect, that
some of them at least, did not proceed from mere
chance, or common accidents; but on the contrary,
from the premeditated malice and wicked pursuits
of evil and designing persons; and therefore, it
greatly behoves us to use our utmost diligence, by
all lawful ways and means to discover the
contrivers and perpetrators of such daring and
flagitious undertakings: that, upon conviction, they
may receive condign punishment; for although we
have the happiness of living under a government
which exceeds all others in the excellency of its
constitution and laws, yet if those to whom the
execution of them (which my lord Coke calls the
life and soul of the law) is committed, do not exert
themselves in a conscientious discharge of their
respective duties, such laws which were intended
for a terror to the evil-doer, and a protection to the
good, will become a dead letter, and our most
excellent constitution turned into anarchy and
confusion. [ . . .]
I am told there are several prisoners now in jail,
who have been committed by the city magistrates,
upon suspicion of having been concerned in some
of the late fires; and others, who under pretence
of assisting the unhappy sufferers, by saving their
goods from the flames, for stealing, or receiving
them. [ . . .]
Arson, or the malicious and voluntary burning,
not only a mansion house, but also any other
house, and the out buildings, or barns, and stables
adjoining thereto, by night or by day, is felony at
common law; and if any part of the house be
burned, the offender is guilty of felony,
notwithstanding the fire afterwards be put out, or
go out of itself.
This crime is of so shocking a nature, that if we
have any in this city, who, having been guilty
thereof, should escape, who can say he is safe, or
tell where it will end?
Gentlemen,
Another Thing which I cannot omit
recommending to your serious and diligent
inquiry, is to find out and present all such persons
who sell rum, and other strong liquor to negroes.
762

It must be obvious to every one, that there are too
many of them in this city; who, under pretence of
selling what they call a penny dram to a negro,
will sell to him as many quarts or gallons of rum,
as he can steal money or goods to pay for. [ . . .]
The many fatal consequences flowing from this
prevailing and wicked practice, are so notorious,
and so nearly concern us all, that one would be
almost surprised, to think there should be a
necessity for a court to recommend a suppression
of such pernicious houses: thus much in
particular; now in general.
My charge, gentlemen, further is, to present all
conspiracies, combinations, and other offences,
from treasons down to trespasses; and in your
inquiries, the oath you, and each of you have just
now taken will, I am persuaded, be your guide,
and I pray God to direct and assist you in the
discharge of your duty. [ . . .]
Source
Supreme Court of Judicature, New York City. “New
York Conspiracy.” Journal of the Proceedings
against the Conspirators, at New York in 1741.
Available at http://www.therblig.com/GLCSSRA/
archive/912.htm.

Francis Parkman, The Conspiracy of Pontiac
(1880)
This passage represents the classic statement of
Pontiac’s War as a “conspiracy” undertaken by evil
and cunning “savages” against their British overlords after the conquest of Canada. Parkman,
whose renowned flair for the dramatic at times led
him to sweeping interpretive conclusions with minimum supporting evidence, consciously selected the
Odawa chief Pontiac’s uprising as an example of
Native American character that resonated deeply
with an American nation in the process of completing its military conquest of the Plains tribes.
Although Parkman’s Pontiac possessed formidable
organizational capacities and an admirable degree
of tenacity, he and his people were nevertheless
unable to stave off the inevitable advance of a superior civilization into their territory. Subsequent
historians have pointed out the flaws in Parkman’s
conspiracy thesis, but his early and powerfully

Francis Parkman, The Conspiracy of Pontiac

written description of the conflict has retained considerable influence to the present day.
It was a momentous and gloomy crisis for the
Indian race, for never before had they been
exposed to such imminent and pressing danger.
With the downfall of Canada, the tribes had sunk
at once from their position of importance.
Hitherto the two rival European nations had kept
each other in check upon the American continent,
and the Indians had, in some measure, held the
balance of power between them. To conciliate
their good will and gain their alliance, to avoid
offending them by injustice and encroachment,
was the policy both of the French and English.
But now the face of affairs was changed. The
English had gained an undisputed ascendency,
and the Indians, no longer important as allies,
were treated as mere barbarians, who might be
trampled upon with impunity. Abandoned to their
own feeble resources and divided strength, they
must fast recede, and dwindle away before the
steady progress of the colonial power. Already
their best hunting-grounds were invaded, and
from the eastern ridges of the Alleghenies they
might see, from far and near, the smoke of the
settlers’ clearings, rising in tall columns from the
dark-green bosom of the forest. The doom of the
race was sealed, and no human power could avert
it; but they, in their ignorance, believed otherwise,
and vainly thought that, by a desperate effort,
they might yet uproot and overthrow the growing
strength of their destroyers.
It would be idle to suppose that the great mass
of the Indians understood, in its full extent, the
danger which threatened their race. With them,
the war was a mere outbreak of fury, and they
turned against their enemies with as little reason or
forecast as a panther when he leaps at the throat of
the hunter. Goaded by wrongs and indignities, they
struck for revenge, and for relief from the evil of
the moment. But the mind of Pontiac could
embrace a wider and deeper view. The peril of the
times was unfolded in its full extent before him,
and he resolved to unite the tribes in one grand
effort to avert it. He did not, like many of his

people, entertain the absurd idea that the Indians,
by their unaided strength, could drive the English
into the sea. He adopted the only plan consistent
with reason, that of restoring the French
ascendency in the west, and once more opposing a
check to British encroachment. With views like
these, he lent a greedy ear to the plausible
falsehoods of the Canadians, who assured him that
the armies of King Louis were already advancing to
recover Canada, and that the French and their red
brethren, fighting side by side, would drive the
English dogs back within their own narrow limits.
Revolving these thoughts, and remembering that
his own ambitious views might be advanced by the
hostilities he meditated, Pontiac no longer
hesitated. Revenge, ambition, and patriotism
wrought upon him alike, and he resolved on war. At
the close of the year 1762, he sent ambassadors to
the different nations. They visited the country of
the Ohio and its tributaries, passed northward to
the region of the upper lakes, and the borders of
the River Ottawa; and far southward towards the
mouth of the Mississippi. Bearing with them the
war-belt of wampum, broad and long, as the
importance of the message demanded, and the
tomahawk stained red, in token of war, they went
from camp to camp, and village to village.
Wherever they appeared, the sachems and old men
assembled, to hear the words of the great Pontiac.
Then the chief of the embassy flung down the
tomahawk on the ground before them, and holding
the war-belt in his hand, delivered, with vehement
gesture, word for word, the speech with which he
was charged. It was heard everywhere with
approval; the belt was accepted, the hatchet
snatched up, and the assembled chiefs stood
pledged to take part in the war. The blow was to be
struck at a certain time in the month of May
following, to be indicated by the changes of the
moon. The tribes were to rise together, each
destroying the English garrison in its neighborhood,
and then, with a general rush, the whole were to
turn against the settlements of the frontier.
Source
Parkman, Francis. 1880. The Conspiracy of Pontiac
and the Indian War after the Conquest of

763

Matthew Smith and James Gibson, “A Declaration and Remonstrance”

Canada. 9th ed., 2 vols. Boston: Little, Brown, I:
184–187.

Matthew Smith and James Gibson, “A
Declaration and Remonstrance of the
Distressed and Bleeding Frontier Inhabitants
of the Province of Pennsylvania” (1764)
Like Bacon’s Rebellion before it, the conspiratorial
uprising of the Paxton Boys fused racial violence
with charges of political and social inequality to
focus their force on a dual-headed enemy: a
provincial elite and their indigenous allies. Smith
and Gibson’s focus on the plight of frontier families
highlights the need for these regulators to take the
law into their own hands.
To the Honourable JOHN PENN, Esquire,
Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, and of
the Counties of New-Castle, Kent and Sussex, on
Delaware; and to the Representatives of the FreeMen of said Province, in Assembly met.
We Matthew Smith, and James Gibson, in
behalf of ourselves, and his Majesty’s faithful and
loyal Subjects, the Inhabitants of the Frontier
Counties of Lancaster, York, Cumberland, Berks,
and Northampton, humbly beg Leave to
remonstrate, and to lay before you, the following
Grievances, which we submit to your Wisdom, for
Redress.
1st. WE apprehend, that as Free-Men and
English Subjects, we have an indisputable Title to
the same Priviledges and Immunities with his
Majesty’s other subjects, who reside in the interior
Counties of Philadelphia, Chester, and Bucks, and
therefore ought not to be excluded from an equal
Share with them in the very important Priviledge
of Legislation. Nevertheless, contrary to the
Proprietors Charter, and the acknowledged
principles of Common Justice and Equity, our five
Counties are restrained from electing more than
ten Representatives, viz, Four for Lancaster, Two
for York, Two for Cumberland, One for Berks,
and one for Northampton; while the Three
Counties (and City) of Philadelphia, Chester, and
Bucks, elect Twenty-six; this we humbly conceive
764

is oppressive, unequal and unjust, the Cause of
many of our Grievances, and an infringement of
our natural Priviledges of Freedom and Equality,
wherefore we humbly pray, that we may be no
longer deprived of an equal Number with the
Three aforesaid Counties, to represent us in
Assembly.
2dly. WE understand that a Bill is now before
the House of Assembly, wherein it is Provided,
that such Persons as shall be charged with killing
any Indians in Lancaster County, shall not be
tried in the County where the Fact was
committed, but in the Counties of Philadelphia,
Chester, or Bucks. This is manifestly to deprive
British Subjects of their known Privileges, to cast
an eternal Reproach upon whole Counties, as if
they were unfit to serve their Country in the
Quality of Jury-Men, and to contradict the well
known Laws of the British Nation, in a point
whereon Life, Liberty, and Security essentially
depend: Namely that of being tried by their
Equals in the Neighbourhood where their own,
their Accusers, and the Witnesses Character and
Credit, with the Circumstances of the Fact are
best known, and instead thereof, putting their
lives in the Hands of Strangers, who may as justly
be suspected of Partiality to, as the Frontier
Counties can be of Prejudices against Indians . . .
3dly. DURING the late and present Indian
Wars, the Frontiers of this Province have been
repeatedly attacked and ravaged by Skulking
parties of Indians, who have with the most savage
Cruelty, murdered Men, Women, and Children,
without distinction; and have reduced near a
Thousand Families to the most extream Distress.
It grieves us to the very Heart, to see such of our
Frontier Inhabitants as have escaped from savage
Fury, with the loss of their Parents, their
Children, their Husbands, Wives, or Relatives, left
destitute by the Public, and exposed to the most
cruel Poverty and Wretchedness; while upwards
of One Hundred and Twenty of the Savages, who
are with great Reason suspected of being guilty of
these horrid Barbarities, under the Mask of
Friendship, have procured themselves to be taken
under the Protection of the Government, with a

Richard Henry Lee, “The Westmoreland Resolves”

view to elude the Fury of the brave Relatives of
the Murdered; and are now maintained at the
public Expence. . . .
4thly. WE humbly conceive that it is contrary to
the Maxims of good Policy and extreamly
dangerous to our Frontiers, to suffer any Indians
of what Tribe soever, to live within the inhabited
Parts of this Province, while we are engaged in an
Indian War; as Experience has taught us that they
are all Perfidious, and their Claim to Freedom
and Independency puts it in their Power to act as
Spies, to entertain and give Intelligence to our
Enemies, and to furnish them with Provisions and
warlike Stores. . . .
5th. WE cannot help lamenting that no
Provision has been hitherto made, that such of
our Frontier Inhabitants as have been wounded in
defence of the Province, their Lives and Liberties,
may be taken care of and cured of their Wounds
at public Expence. We therefore pray that this
Grievance may be redressed.
6thly. IN the late Indian War this Province,
with other of his Majesty’s Colonies gave rewards
for Indian Scalps, to encourage the seeking them
in their own Country, as the most likely Means of
destroying or reducing them to reason. But no
such Encouragement has been given in this War,
which has dampened the Spirits of many brave
Men, who are willing to venture their Lives in
Parties against the Enemy. We therefore pray that
Public Rewards may be proposed for Indian
Scalps, which may be adequate to the Dangers
attending Enterprises of this Nature.
7th. WE daily lament that Numbers of our
nearest and dearest Relatives are still in Captivity
amongst the savage Heathen, to be trained up in
all their ignorance and Barbarity, or be tortured to
death with all the Contrivances of Indian cruelty,
for attempting to make their Escape from
Bondage. We see they pay no regard to the many
solemn Promises which they made to restore our
Friends, who are in Bondage amonst them; we
therefore earnestly pray that no Trade may
hereafter by permitted to be carried on with
them, untill our Brethren and Relatives are
brought home to us. . . .

SIGNED on Behalf of ourselves, and by
Appointment of a Great Number of the Frontier
Inhabitants.
MATTHEW SMITH,
JAMES GIBSON
February 13th, 1764
Source
Dunbar, John R. 1957. The Paxton Papers. The
Hague: Martinus Nijoff.

Richard Henry Lee, “The
Westmoreland Resolves” (1766)
The following document reflects the sense of alarm
that the Stamp Act generated in certain circles and
the lengths to which some Americans were willing
to go in order to combat what they regarded as an
infringement of their rights as Englishmen. The
more propagandistic “Virginia Resolves,” authored
by Patrick Henry, emphasized the issue of taxation
without representation; Richard Henry Lee, however, stressed the fear of a deliberate conspiracy
both “foreign and domestic” to enslave the Americans, calling for violent resistance if necessary.
Additionally, the threat of violence proved real.
Shortly after the adoption of the “Westmoreland
Resolves,” Archibald Ritchie announced his intention to use stamped paper, and Lee led a group of
associates against Ritchie’s home and threatened
public humiliation and bodily harm if Ritchie persisted. In the face of such challenge, Ritchie reluctantly relented and bowed to the association’s
demands.
The Association of Westmoreland:
The following articles prepared and offered by
RICHARD HENRY LEE were passed by the
patriots of that day at LEEDSTOWN, Virginia,
on the 27th day of February 1766.
“ROUSED BY DANGER, and alarmed at
attempts, foreign and domestic, to reduce the
people of this country to a state of abject and
detestable slavery, by destroying that FREE and
happy constitution of government, under which
they have hitherto lived—WE, who subscribe to
this paper, have associated, and do bind ourselves
765

A Short Narrative of the Horrid Massacre in Boston

to each other, to GOD and to our country, by the
firmest ties that RELIGION and virtue can
frame, most sacredly and punctually to stand by,
and with our lives and fortunes, to SUPPORT,
MAINTAIN, and DEFEND each other in the
observance and execution of these FOLLOWING
ARTICLES:
FIRST. We declare all due allegiance and
obedience to our lawful sovereign; George the
Third, King of Great Britain. And we determine
to do the utmost in our power to preserve the
laws, the peace and good order of this Colony, as
far as is consistent with the preservation of our
Constitutional rights and liberty.
SECONDLY. As we know it to be the
Birthright privilege of every British subject (and
of the people of Virginia as being such) founded
on Reason, Law, and Compact; that he cannot be
legally tried, but by his peers; and that he cannot
be taxed, but by a consent of a Parliament, in
which he is represented by persons chosen by the
people and who themselves pay a part of the tax
they impose on others. If therefore, any person or
persons shall attempt, by any action or
proceeding, to deprive this Colony of those
fundamental rights, we will immediately regard
him or them, as the most dangerous enemy of the
community; and we will go to any extremity, not
only to prevent the success of such attempts, but
to stigmatize and punish the offender.
THIRDLY. As the Stamp Act does absolutely
direct the property of the people to be taken from
them without their consent expressed by their
representatives and as in many cases it deprives
the British American Subject of his right to trial
by jury; we do determine, at every hazard, and,
paying no regard to danger or to death, we will
exert every faculty to prevent the execution of the
said Stamp Act in any instance whatsoever within
this Colony. And every abandoned wretch, who
shall be so lost to virtue and public good, as
wickedly to contribute to the introduction or
fixture of the Stamp Act in this Colony, by using
stampt paper, or by any other means, we will, with
the utmost expedition, convince all such

766

profligates that immediate danger and disgrace
shall attend their prostitute purposes.
FOURTHLY. That the last article may most
surely and effectually be executed, we engage to
each other, that whenever it shall be known to any
of this association, that any person is so
conducting himself as to favor the introduction of
the Stamp Act, that immediate notice shall be
given to as many of the association as possible;
and that every individual so informed, shall, with
expedition, repair to a place of meeting to be
appointed as near the scene of action as may be.
FIFTHLY. Each associator shall do his true
endeavor to obtain as many signers to this
association as may be.
SIXTHLY. If any attempt shall be made on the
liberty or property of any associator for any action
or thing to be done in consequence of this
agreement, we do most solemnly bind ourselves
by the sacred engagements above entered into, at
the risk of our lives and fortunes to restore such
associate to his liberty, and to protect him in the
enjoyment of his property.”
In testimony of the good faith with which we
resolve to execute this association we have on this
27th day of February 1766, in Virginia, put our
hands and seals hereto.
[115 signatures follow]
Source
Chitwood, Oliver Perry. Richard Henry Lee:
Statesman of the Revolution. Morgantown: West
Virginia University Library, 239–241.

A Short Narrative of the Horrid
Massacre in Boston (1770)
The following extract is from the official history of
the Boston Massacre from the patriot’s perspective.
It seeks to place the engagement in the broader context of the British occupation of Boston and
recounts the numerous encounters between Bostonians and soldiers in the months leading up to 5
March 1770. This account served to inflame the
colonists by placing blame squarely on the British
soldiers, and it also emphasizes colonists’ fears

A Short Narrative of the Horrid Massacre in Boston

about a conspiracy to deprive them of their liberties as well as the tensions between the Redcoats
and the city’s residents.
[ . . .] The numerous instances of bad behaviour
in the soldiery made us early sensible, that the
troops were not sent here for any benefit to the
town or province, and that we had no good to
expect from such conservators of the peace.
It was not expected, however, that such an
outrage and massacre, as happened here on the
evening of the fifth instant, would have been
perpetrated. There were then killed and
wounded, by a discharge of musquetry, eleven of
his Majesty’s subjects [ . . .].
The actors in this dreadful tragedy were a party
of soldiers commanded by Capt. Preston of the
29th regiment: This party, including the Captain,
consisted of eight, who were all committed to
goal.
There are depositions in this affair which
mention, that several guns were fired at the same
time from the Custom-House; before which this
shocking scene was exhibited. Into this matter
inquisition is now making.—In the mean time it
may be proper to insert here the substance of
some of those depositions. [ . . .]
Gillam Bass, being in King-street at the same
time, declares that they (the party of soldiers from
the main guard) posted themselves between the
custom-house door, and the west corner of it; and
in a few minutes began to fire upon the people:
Two or three of the flashes so high above the rest,
that the deponent verily believes they must have
come from the CUSTOM-HOUSE windows. [ . . .]
What gave occasion to the melancholy event of
the evening seems to have been this. A difference
having happened near Mr. Gray’s ropewalk,
between a soldier and a man belonging to it, the
soldiers challenged the ropemakers to a boxing
match. The challenge was accepted by one of
them, and the soldier worsted. He ran to the
barracks in the neighbourhood, and returned with
several of his companions. The fray was renewed,
and the soldiers were driven off.—They soon

returned with recruits and were again worsted.
This happened several times, till at length a
considerable body of soldiers was collected, and
they also were driven off, the ropemakers having
been joined by the brethren of the contiguous
ropewalks. By this time Mr. Gray being alarmed
interposed, and with the assistance of some
gentlemen prevented any further disturbance. To
satisfy the soldiers and punish the man who had
been the occasion of the first difference, and as an
example to the rest, he turned him out of his
service; and waited on Col. Dalrymple, the
commanding officer of the troops, and with him
concerted measure for preventing further
mischief. Though this affair ended thus, it made a
strong impression on the minds of the soldiers in
general, who thought the honor of the regiment
concerned to revenge those repeated repulses.
For this purpose they seem to have formed a
combination to commit some outrage upon the
inhabitants of the town indiscriminately; and this
was to be done on the evening of the 5th instant or
soon after: as appears by the depositions of the
following persons, viz.
William Newhall declares that, on Thursday
night the first of March instant, he met four
soldiers of the 29th regiment, and that he heard
them say there were a great many that would eat
their dinners on Monday next, that should not eat
any on Tuesday. Mary Brailsford declares, that on
Sabbath evening the 4th March instant a Soldier
came to the house of Mr. Amos Thayer where she
then was. He desiring to speak with Mr. Thayer
was told by Mrs. Mary Thayer, that her brother
was engaged, and could not be spoke with. He
said, your brother as you call him, is a man I have
great regard for, and I came on purpose to tell
him to keep in his house, for before Tuesday next
night at Twelve o’clock, there will be a great deal
of bloodshed, and a great many lives lost and
added, that he came out of a particular regard to
her brother to advise him to keep in his house, for
then he would be out of harm’s way. He said, your
brother knows me very well: my name is Charles
Malone. He then went away. [ . . .]

767

Samuel Adams, “Letter to Arthur Lee”

By the foregoing depositions it appears very
clearly, there was a general combination among
the soldiers of the 29th regiment at least, to
commit some extraordinary act of violence upon
the town; that if the inhabitants attempted to
repel it by firing even one gun upon those
soldiers, the 14th regiment were ordered to be in
readiness to assist them; and that on the late
butchery in King-street they actually were ready
for that purpose, had a single gun been fired on
the perpetrators of it. [ . . .]
These circumstances with those already
mentioned, amount to a clear proof of a
combination among them to commit some
outrage upon the town on that evening; and that
after the enormous one committed in Kingstreet,
they intended to add to the horrors of that night
by making a further slaughter.
Source
A Short Narrative of the Horrid Massacre in Boston.
1770. Boston: Printed by Order of the Town of
Boston.

Samuel Adams, “Letter to Arthur Lee” (1774)
This letter, written by Samuel Adams in January
1774 in which he reports on the Boston Tea Party,
is filled with references to the British conspiracy to
take away American liberties. He frequently refers
to the British “design” and also notes the “cabal”
involved.
TO ARTHUR LEE.
Jan 25 1774
The sending the East India Companies Tea into
America appears evidently to have been with
Design of the British Administration, and to
complete the favorite plan of establishing a
Revenue in America. The People of Boston and
the other adjacent Towns endeavored to have the
Tea sent back to the place from whence it came &
then to prevent the Design from taking Effect.
Had this been done in Boston, as it was done in
New York & Philadelphia, the Design of the
Ministry would have been as effectually prevented
here as in those Colonies and the property would
768

have been saved. Governor Hutchinson & the
other Crown officers having the Command of the
Castle by which the Ships must have passed, &
other powers in their Hands, made use of these
Powers to defeat the Intentions of the people &
succeeded; in short the Governor who for Art &
Cunning as well as an inveterate hatred of the
people was inferior to no one of the Cabal; both
encouragd & provoked the people to destroy the
Tea. By refusing to grant a Passport he held up to
them the alternative of destroying the property of
the East India Company or suffering that to be
the sure means of unhinging the Security of
property in general in America, and by delaying to
call on the naval power to protect the Tea, he led
them to determine their Choice of Difficulties. In
this View of the Matter the Question is easily
decided who ought in Justice to pay for the Tea if
it ought to be paid for at all.
The Destruction of the Tea is the pretence for
the unprecedented Severity shown to the Town of
Boston but the real Cause is the opposition to
Tyranny for which the people of that Town have
always made themselves remarkeable & for which
I think this Country is much obligd to them. They
are suffering the Vengeance of Administration in
the Common Cause of America.
Sources
MS. Samuel Adams Papers. Lenox, MA: Lenox
Library.
Cushing, Harry A., ed. 1968. The Writings of Samuel
Adams. Vol. 3. New York: Octagon, 78–79.

George Washington, “There Has Been a
Regular, Systematic Plan” (1774)
Like other leaders of the American Revolution,
George Washington argued that the actions of the
British amounted to a systematic scheme to deprive
the American colonies of liberty.
Satisfied, then, that the acts of a British
Parliament are no longer governed by the
principles of justice, that it is trampling upon the
valuable rights of Americans, confirmed to them
by the charter and the constitution they

Alexander Hamilton, “Remarks on the Quebec Bill”

themselves boast of, and convinced beyond the
smallest doubt, that these measures are the result
of deliberation, and attempted to be carried into
execution by the hand of power, is it a time to
trifle, or risk our cause upon petitions, which with
difficulty obtain access, and afterwards are thrown
by with the utmost contempt? [ . . .] I wish, I own,
that the dispute had been left to posterity to
determine, but the crisis is arrived when we must
assert our rights, or submit to every imposition,
that can be heaped upon us, till custom and use
shall make us as tame and abject slaves, as the
blacks we rule over with such arbitrary sway. [ . . .]
I am as fully convinced, as I am of my own
existence, that there has been a regular, systematic
plan formed to enforce [the acts], and that nothing
but unanimity in the colonies (a stroke they did
not expect) and firmness, can prevent it.
Sources
Fitzpatrick, John C., ed. 1931. The Writings of
George Washington from the Original Manuscript
Sources, 1745–1799, III. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Davis, David Brian, ed. 1971. The Fear of
Conspiracy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Alexander Hamilton, “Remarks on the
Quebec Bill” (1775)
A mere eighteen years of age at the time, future
American statesman Alexander Hamilton penned
the following “Remarks on the Quebec Bill” shortly
before abandoning his studies at King’s College
(now Columbia University) to form a volunteer
artillery company. Hamilton appealed to antiCatholic feeling in the American colonies in this
paper, and his tone reflected a clear conviction that
the Quebec Act represented a conspiracy on the
part of the British ministry.
This act develops the dark designs of the
ministry more fully than any thing they have
done, and shows that they have formed a
systematic project of absolute power.
The present policy of it is evidently this: by
giving a legal sanction to the accustomed dues of

the priests, it was intended to interest them in
behalf of the administration; and by means of the
dominion they possessed over the minds of the
laity, together with the appearance of good-will
toward their religion, to prevent any
dissatisfaction which might arise from the loss of
their civil rights, and to propitiate them to the
great purposes in contemplation—first, the
subjugation of the colonies, and afterward that of
Great Britain itself. It was necessary to throw out
some such lure to reconcile them to the exactions
of that power which has been communicated to
the king, and which the emergency of the times
may require in a very extensive degree.
The future policy of it demands particular
attention. The nature of its civil government will
hereafter put a stop to emigrations from other
parts of the British dominions thither, and from
all other free countries. The preeminent
advantages secured to the Roman Catholic
religion will discourage all Protestant settlers, of
whatever nation; and on these accounts, the
province will be settled and inhabited by none but
Papists. If lenity and moderation are observed in
administering the laws, the natural advantages of
this fertile infant country, united to the
indulgence given to their religion, will attract
droves of emigrants from all the Roman Catholic
States in Europe, and these colonies, in time, will
find themselves encompassed with innumerable
hosts of neighbors, disaffected to them, both
because of difference in religion and government.
How dangerous their situation would be, let every
man of common sense judge.
What can speak in plainer language the
corruption of the British Parliament than this act,
which invests the king with absolute power over a
little world (if I may be allowed the expression),
and makes such ample provision for the Popish
religion, and leaves the Protestant in such a
dependent, disadvantageous situation, that he is
like to have no other subjects in this part of the
domain, than Roman Catholics, who, by reason of
their implicit devotion to their priests, and the
superlative reverence they bear those who
countenance and favor their religion will be the
769

“The Declaration of Independence of the Thirteen Colonies in Congress”

voluntary instruments of ambition, and will be
ready, at all times, to second the oppressive
designs of the administration against the other
parts of the empire.
Hence, while our ears are stunned with the
dismal sounds of New England’s republicanism,
bigotry, and intolerance, it behooves us to be
upon our guard against the deceitful wiles of
those who would persuade us that we have
nothing to fear from the operation of the Quebec
Act. We should consider it as being replete with
danger to ourselves, and as threatening ruin to
our posterity. Let us not, therefore, suffer
ourselves to be terrified at the prospect of an
imaginary and fictitious Scylla; and by that means,
be led blindfold into a real and destructive
Charybdis.
Source
Hamilton, Alexander. 1903. “Remarks on the
Quebec Bill [1775].” Pp. 194–196 in The Works
of Alexander Hamilton, vol. 1. Edited by Henry
Cabot Lodge. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons.

“The Declaration of Independence of the
Thirteen Colonies in Congress” (4 July 1776)
The less well-remembered parts of the Declaration
of Independence are those that spell out all the
grievances against the British monarchy. Though
far from a literal accusation of conspiracy, the list
of accusations and suspicions nevertheless builds
up to a picture of a concerted, and at times underhanded, campaign by King George III to deny the
American colonists of their rights.
The history of the present King of Great Britain
is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations,
all having in direct object the establishment of an
absolute Tyranny over these States. To prove this,
let Facts be submitted to a candid world.
He has refused his Assent to Laws, the most
wholesome and necessary for the public good.
He has forbidden his Governors to pass Laws
of immediate and pressing importance, unless
suspended in their operation till his Assent should

770

be obtained; and when so suspended, he has
utterly neglected to attend to them.
He has refused to pass other Laws for the
accommodation of large districts of people, unless
those people would relinquish the right of
Representation in the Legislature, a right
inestimable to them and formidable to tyrants
only.
He has called together legislative bodies at
places unusual, uncomfortable, and distant from
the depository of their public Records, for the
sole purpose of fatiguing them into compliance
with his measures.
He has dissolved Representative Houses
repeatedly, for opposing with manly firmness his
invasions on the rights of the people.
He has refused for a long time, after such
dissolutions, to cause others to be elected;
whereby the Legislative powers, incapable of
Annihilation, have returned to the People at large
for their exercise; the State remaining in the mean
time exposed to all the dangers of invasion from
without, and convulsions within.
He has endeavoured to prevent the population
of these States; for that purpose obstructing the
Laws for Naturalization of Foreigners; refusing to
pass others to encourage their migrations hither,
and raising the conditions of new Appropriations
of Lands.
He has obstructed the Administration of
Justice, by refusing his Assent to Laws for
establishing Judiciary powers.
He has made Judges dependent on his Will
alone, for the tenure of their offices, and the
amount and payment of their salaries.
He has erected a multitude of New Offices,
and sent hither swarms of Officers to harass our
people, and eat out their substance.
He has kept among us, in times of peace,
Standing Armies without the consent of our
legislatures.
He has affected to render the Military
independent of and superior to the Civil power.
He has combined with others to subject us to a
jurisdiction foreign to our constitution and

Aedenus Burke, Considerations on the Society or Order of Cincinnati

unacknowledged by our laws; giving his Assent to
their Acts of pretended Legislation:
For Quartering large bodies of armed troops
among us:
For protecting them, by a mock Trial, from
punishment for any Murders which they should
commit on the Inhabitants of these States:
For cutting off our Trade with all parts of the
world:
For imposing Taxes on us without our Consent:
For depriving us, in many cases, of the benefits
of Trial by Jury:
For transporting us beyond Seas to be tried for
pretended offences:
For abolishing the free System of English Laws
in a neighbouring Province, establishing therein
an Arbitrary government, and enlarging its
Boundaries so as to render it at once an example
and fit instrument for introducing the same
absolute rule into these Colonies:
For taking away our Charters, abolishing our
most valuable Laws, and altering fundamentally
the Forms of our Governments:
For suspending our own Legislatures, and
declaring themselves invested with power to
legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.
He has abdicated Government here, by
declaring us out of his Protection and waging War
against us.
He has plundered our seas, ravaged our Coasts,
burnt our towns, and destroyed the lives of our
people.
He is at this time transporting large Armies of
foreign Mercenaries to compleat the works of
death, desolation and tyranny, already begun with
circumstances of Cruelty and perfidy scarcely
paralleled in the most barbarous ages, and totally
unworthy the Head of a civilized nation.
He has constrained our fellow Citizens taken
Captive on the high Seas to bear Arms against
their Country, to become the executioners of their
friends and Brethren, or to fall themselves by
their Hands.
He has excited domestic insurrections amongst
us, and has endeavoured to bring on the

inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian
Savages, whose known rule of warfare, is an
undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and
conditions.
Source
“The Declaration of Independence of the Thirteen
Colonies in Congress.” 4 July 1776.

Aedenus Burke, Considerations on the
Society or Order of Cincinnati (1783)
This pamphlet was written by Aedenus Burke, a
judge on the high court of South Carolina, under
the pseudonym Cassius, as a warning against the
Society of the Cincinnati. Burke accused the Society, an organization of Revolutionary War officers,
of being the origin of a hereditary nobility that
would in short time subvert the liberty won in the
American Revolution.
The following publication is intended to convey
a few observations to my fellow citizens, on a new
Society or Institution lately established
throughout the continent, composed of the MajorGenerals, Brigadiers, and other Officers of our
army. It is instituted by the name of “THE
SOCIETY OF THE CINCINNATI,” and it has
arrived to considerable strength and maturity
already. [ . . .]
The more I reflect on this institution, and the
political consequences it will involve, the more am
I filled with astonishment, that self created as it is,
and coming upon us in so bold and questionable
an appearance, so deeply planned, and closely
executed, yet that it should have been so little
attended to, that it is not even the subject of
private conversation. Could I for a moment view
this Order with indifference, it would be
impossible not to smile, to behold the populace of
America, in their town committees and town
meetings, so keenly bent on petty mischiefs, in
full chase and cry after a few insignificant tories,
and running on regardless of an establishment,
which ere long must strip the posterity of the
middling and lower classes of every influence or

771

Aedenus Burke, Considerations on the Society or Order of Cincinnati

authority, and leave them nothing but
insignificance, contempt, and the wretched
privilege of murmuring when it is too late. So
thoughtless are the multitude! [ . . .]
The sixth article of our confederation says, “Nor
shall the United States in Congress assembled,
nor any of them grant any title of nobility.” But
the order of Cincinnati usurp a nobility without
gift or grant, in defiance of Congress and the
states, as I shall shew presently. And though the
order cannot, at present be sanctified by legal
authority, yet that makes nothing against the
consequences which will ensue. Though the
Order is self-created, and in infringement of a
general law of the Union; yet if the courage of the
officers does not fail them; if they but keep up
with firmness and perseverance against
opposition, for this will be but trifling, so
unthinking are the people; if they have but
patience, subtilty, and address to cloke their
design under a pious name of raising a charitable
fund; so as to make it go down only for a few
years; even if they are obliged from policy to lay
aside the badge and blue ribbon: My life for it,
they will have leisure to laugh at, and master their
opponents. And the next generation will drink as
deep of noble blood, and a hereditary peerage be
as firmly settled in each potent family, and
rivetted in our government, as any order of
nobility is in the monarchies of Europe. This
Order is planted in a fiery, hot ambition, and thrill
for power; and its branches will end in tyranny.
The Cincinnati will soon be corrupted, and the
spirit of the people depressed; for in less than a
century it will occasion such an inequality in the
condition of our inhabitants, that the country will
be composed only of two ranks of men; the
patricians or nobles, and the rabble. This is the
natural result of an establishment, whose
departure is so sudden from our open professions
of republicanism, that it must give a thinking
mind most melancholy forebodings. This creating
of a nobility, and breaking through our
constitution, just as we were setting out in the
world, is making that liberty which the Almighty
has given us, a means for feeding our pride; and
772

turning the blessings of Providence into a curse
upon us. [ . . .]
I have proved I hope to the reader’s satisfaction,
that the Cincinnati creates two distinct orders
amongst us. 1st. A race of hereditary Nobles,
founded on the military, together with the powerful
families, and first rate, leading men in the state,
whose view it will ever be, to rule: and 2d. The
people or plebeians, whose only view is not to be
oppressed; but whose certain fate it will be to
suffer oppression under the institutions: I have
shewed that it is a deep laid contrivance to beget,
and perpetuate family grandeur in an aristocratic
Nobility, to terminate at last in monarchical
tyranny. And I shall now pass on to point out the
constitutional means of opposing it. [ . . .]
To crush this Order, then, without embroiling
the state, there is but one way. Let the legislature
immediately enter into spirited resolutions against
it; let them tell the Order, and the world, that
however pious or patriotic the pretence, yet any
political combination of military commanders, is
in a republican government, extremely hazardous,
and highly censurable. But that instituting
exclusive honours and privileges of an Hereditary
Order, is a daring usurpation of the sovereignty of
the republic; a dangerous insult to the rights and
liberties of the people, and a fatal stab to that
principle of equality, which forms the basis of our
government; to establish which the people fought
and bled as well as the Cincinnati; though the
latter are now taking every measure to rob them
of the credit, and of the fruits of it. [ . . .]
These things I know too well, to entertain the
vain hope of any individual succeeding in
opposition. But although I foresee the
consequences, yet I think it a point of duty to give
this public testimony of my dislike of the Order.
[ . . .]
Source
Burke, Aedanus. 1783. Considerations on the
Society or Order of Cincinnati; Lately Instituted
by the Major-Generals, Brigadier-Generals, and
Other Officers of the American Army. Proving
That It Creates a Race of Hereditary Patricians or
Nobility. Interspersed with Remarks on Its

George Mason, “Objections . . . to the Proposed Federal Constitution”

Consequences to the Freedom and Happiness of
the Republic. Addressed to the People of South
Carolina, and Their Representatives. Charleston:
Timothy. Reprint, Philadelphia: Robert Bell.

George Mason, “Objections . . . to the
Proposed Federal Constitution” (1787)
George Mason was a respected Virginia planter
and member of the Federal Convention. In this
pamphlet he sets out his anti-Federalist objections
to the constitution, arguing that it would give a
dangerous and potentially corrupting amount of
power to an unaccountable central elite.
There is no declaration of rights: and the laws
of the general government being paramount to
the laws and constitutions of the several states,
the declarations of rights, in the separate states,
are no security. Nor are the people secured even
in the enjoyment of the benefit of the common
law, which stands here upon no other foundation
than its having been adopted by the respective
acts forming the constitutions of the several states.
In the House of Representatives there is not
the substance, but the shadow only of
representation; which can never produce proper
information in the legislature, or inspire
confidence in the people.—The laws will,
therefore, be generally made by men little
concerned in, and unacquainted with their effects
and consequences.
The Senate have no power of altering all
money-bills, and or originating appropriations of
money, and the salaries of the officers of their
appointment, in conjunction with the President of
the United States—Although they are not the
representatives of the people, or amenable to
them. These, with their other great powers, (viz.
their powers in the appointment of ambassadors,
and all public officers, in making treaties, and in
trying all impeachments) their influence upon,
and connection with, the supreme executive from
these causes, their duration of office, and their
being a constant existing body, almost continually
sitting, joined with their being one complete

branch of the legislature, will destroy any balance
in the government, and enable them to
accomplish what usurpations they please, upon
the rights and liberties of the people.
The judiciary of the United States is so
constructed and extended, as to absorb and
destroy the judiciaries of the several states;
thereby rendering laws as tedious, intricate, and
expensive, and justice as unattainable by a great
part of the community, as in England; and
enabling the rich to oppress and ruin the poor.
The President of the United States has no
constitutional council (a thing unknown in any
safe and regular government.) He will therefore
be unsupported by proper information and
advice; and will generally be directed by minions
and favorites—or he will become the tool to the
Senate—or a council of state will grow out of the
principal officers of the great departments—the
worst and most dangerous of all ingredients for
such a council, in a free country; for they may be
induced to join in any dangerous or oppressive
measures, to shelter themselves, and prevent an
inquiry into their own misconduct in office.
Whereas, had a constitutional council been
formed (as was proposed) of six members, viz.,
two from the eastern, two from the middle, and
two from the southern states, to be appointed by
vote of the states in the House of Representatives,
with the same duration and rotation of office as
the Senate, the executive would always have had
safe and proper information and advice; the
president of such a council might have acted as
Vice-President of the United States, protempore,
upon any vacancy or disability of the chief
magistrate; and long continued sessions of the
Senate, would in a great measure have been
prevented. From this fatal defect of a
constitutional council, has arisen the improper
power of the Senate, in the appointment of the
public officers, and the alarming dependence and
connexion between that branch of the legislature
and the supreme executive. Hence, also, sprung
that unnecessary officer, the Vice-President, who,
for want of other employment, is made President
of the Senate; thereby dangerously blending the
773

George Washington, “Farewell Address”

executive and legislative powers; besides always
giving to some one of the states an unnecessary
and unjust pre-eminence over the others.
The President of the United States has the
unrestrained power of granting pardon for treason;
which may be sometimes exercised to screen from
punishment those whom he had secretly instigated
to commit the crime, and thereby prevent a
discovery of his own guilt. By declaring all treaties
supreme laws of the land, the executive and the
Senate have, in many cases, an exclusive power of
legislation, which might have been avoided, by
proper distinctions with respect to treaties, and
requiring the assent of the House of
Representatives, where it could be done with safety.
[ . . .]
Under their own construction of the general
clause at the end of the enumerated powers, the
Congress may grant monopolies in trade and
commerce, constitute new crimes, inflict unusual
and severe punishments, and extend their power
as far as they shall think proper; so that the state
legislatures have no security for the powers now
presumed to remain to them; or the people for
their rights. There is no declaration of any kind
for preserving the liberty of the press, the trial by
jury in civil cases, nor against the danger of
standing armies in time of peace.
[ . . .]
This government will commence in a moderate
aristocracy; it is at present impossible to foresee
whether it will, in its operation, produce a
monarchy, or a corrupt oppressive aristocracy; it
will most probably vibrate some years between the
two, and then terminate in the one or the other.
Source
Mason, George. [1787] 1888. The Objections of the
Hon. George Mason to the Proposed Federal
Constitution. Reprinted in Pamphlets on the
Constitution of the United States. Edited by Paul
Leicester Ford. Brooklyn: N.p.

George Washington, “Farewell Address”
(1796)
In 1796 George Washington decided not to stand
for reelection, and in his farewell address, he
774

warned the nation of the “batteries of internal and
external enemies” that he perceived to be gathering
on the horizon.
[ . . .] Here, perhaps, I ought to stop. But a
solicitude for your welfare, which cannot end but
with my life, and the apprehension of danger,
natural to that solicitude, urge me, on an occasion
like the present, to offer to your solemn
contemplation, and to recommend to your
frequent review, some sentiments which are the
result of much reflection, of no inconsiderable
observation, and which appear to me allimportant to the permanency of your felicity as a
people. [ . . .] The unity of government which
constitutes you one people is also now dear to
you. It is justly so, for it is a main pillar in the
edifice of your real independence, the support of
your tranquility at home, your peace abroad; of
your safety; of your prosperity; of that very liberty
which you so highly prize. But as it is easy to
foresee that, from different causes and from
different quarters, much pains will be taken,
many artifices employed to weaken in your minds
the conviction of this truth; as this is the point in
your political fortress against which the batteries
of internal and external enemies will be most
constantly and actively (though often covertly and
insidiously) directed, it is of infinite moment that
you should properly estimate the immense value
of your national union to your collective and
individual happiness; that you should cherish a
cordial, habitual, and immovable attachment to it;
accustoming yourselves to think and speak of it as
of the palladium of your political safety and
prosperity; watching for its preservation with
jealous anxiety; discountenancing whatever may
suggest even a suspicion that it can in any event
be abandoned; and indignantly frowning upon the
first dawning of every attempt to alienate any
portion of our country from the rest, or to
enfeeble the sacred ties which now link together
the various parts. [ . . .]
While, then, every part of our country thus
feels an immediate and particular interest in
union, all the parts combined cannot fail to find in

George Washington, “Farewell Address”

the united mass of means and efforts greater
strength, greater resource, proportionably greater
security from external danger, a less frequent
interruption of their peace by foreign nations;
and, what is of inestimable value, they must
derive from union an exemption from those broils
and wars between themselves, which so
frequently afflict neighboring countries not tied
together by the same governments, which their
own rival ships alone would be sufficient to
produce, but which opposite foreign alliances,
attachments, and intrigues would stimulate and
embitter. Hence, likewise, they will avoid the
necessity of those overgrown military
establishments which, under any form of
government, are inauspicious to liberty, and which
are to be regarded as particularly hostile to
republican liberty. In this sense it is that your
union ought to be considered as a main prop of
your liberty, and that the love of the one ought to
endear to you the preservation of the other. [ . . .]
In contemplating the causes which may disturb
our Union, it occurs as matter of serious concern
that any ground should have been furnished for
characterizing parties by geographical
discriminations, Northern and Southern, Atlantic
and Western; whence designing men may
endeavor to excite a belief that there is a real
difference of local interests and views. One of the
expedients of party to acquire influence within
particular districts is to misrepresent the opinions
and aims of other districts. You cannot shield
yourselves too much against the jealousies and
heartburnings which spring from these
misrepresentations; they tend to render alien to
each other those who ought to be bound together
by fraternal affection. The inhabitants of our
Western country have lately had a useful lesson on
this head; they have seen, in the negotiation by
the Executive, and in the unanimous ratification
by the Senate, of the treaty with Spain, and in the
universal satisfaction at that event, throughout the
United States, a decisive proof how unfounded
were the suspicions propagated among them of a
policy in the General Government and in the
Atlantic States unfriendly to their interests in

regard to the Mississippi; they have been
witnesses to the formation of two treaties, that
with Great Britain, and that with Spain, which
secure to them everything they could desire, in
respect to our foreign relations, towards
confirming their prosperity. Will it not be their
wisdom to rely for the preservation of these
advantages on the Union by which they were
procured? Will they not henceforth be deaf to
those advisers, if such there are, who would sever
them from their brethren and connect them with
aliens? [ . . .]
All obstructions to the execution of the laws, all
combinations and associations, under whatever
plausible character, with the real design to direct,
control, counteract, or awe the regular
deliberation and action of the constituted
authorities, are destructive of this fundamental
principle, and of fatal tendency. They serve to
organize faction, to give it an artificial and
extraordinary force; to put, in the place of the
delegated will of the nation the will of a party,
often a small but artful and enterprising minority
of the community; and, according to the alternate
triumphs of different parties, to make the public
administration the mirror of the ill-concerted and
incongruous projects of faction, rather than the
organ of consistent and wholesome plans digested
by common counsels and modified by mutual
interests.
However combinations or associations of the
above description may now and then answer
popular ends, they are likely, in the course of time
and things, to become potent engines, by which
cunning, ambitious, and unprincipled men will be
enabled to subvert the power of the people and to
usurp for themselves the reins of government,
destroying afterwards the very engines which have
lifted them to unjust dominion. [ . . .]
I have already intimated to you the danger of
parties in the State, with particular reference to
the founding of them on geographical
discriminations. Let me now take a more
comprehensive view, and warn you in the most
solemn manner against the baneful effects of the
spirit of party generally.
775

Thomas Jefferson, “Minute of Conversation with Genet”

This spirit, unfortunately, is inseparable from
our nature, having its root in the strongest
passions of the human mind. It exists under
different shapes in all governments, more or less
stifled, controlled, or repressed; but, in those of
the popular form, it is seen in its greatest
rankness, and is truly their worst enemy.
The alternate domination of one faction over
another, sharpened by the spirit of revenge, natural
to party dissension, which in different ages and
countries has perpetrated the most horrid
enormities, is itself a frightful despotism. But this
leads at length to a more formal and permanent
despotism. The disorders and miseries which result
gradually incline the minds of men to seek security
and repose in the absolute power of an individual;
and sooner or later the chief of some prevailing
faction, more able or more fortunate than his
competitors, turns this disposition to the purposes
of his own elevation, on the ruins of public liberty.
Source
Available at http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/
washing.htm.

Thomas Jefferson, “Minute of
Conversation with Genet” (1793)
In the following document, Secretary of State
Thomas Jefferson describes his 5 July 1793 meeting
with French Foreign Minister Edmond Genet, in
which Genet tells Jefferson of his ambitious scheme
to encourage a revolt among the inhabitants of
Louisiana and Canada, as well as his plan to
launch an attack upon New Orleans.
Mr. Genet called on me, and read to me very
rapidly instructions he had prepared for Michuad
[French botanist Andre Michaux] who is going to
Kentucky; an address to the inhabitants of
Louisiana, and another to those of Canada. In
these papers it appears that, besides encouraging
those inhabitants to insurrection, he speaks of two
generals at Kentucky who have proposed to him
to go and take New Orleans if he will furnish the
expense, about £3000 sterling. He declines
advancing it, but promises that sum ultimately for
776

their expenses, proposes that officers shall be
commissioned by himself in Kentucky and
Louisiana, that they shall rendezvous out of the
territories of the United States,—suppose in
Louisiana, and there making up a battalion to be
called the——— of inhabitants of Louisiana and
Kentucky and getting what Indians they could, to
undertake the expedition against N. Orleans, and
then Louisiana to be established into an
independent state, connected in commerce with
France and the US; that two frigates shall go into
the river Mississippi and cooperate against New
Orleans—the address to Canada, was enough to
them to shake off English yoke, to call Indians to
their assistance, and to assure them of the friendly
dispositions of their neighbors of the US.
He said he communicated these things to me,
not as Secretary of State, but as Mr. Jefferson. I
told him that his enticing officers and soldiers from
Kentucky to go against Spain, was really putting a
halter about their necks, for that they would
assuredly be hung, if they commenced hostilities
against a nation at peace with the US. That leaving
out that article I did not care what insurrection
should be excited in Louisiana, he had, about a
fortnight ago sent me a communication for
Michaud as Consul of France at Kentucky, and
desired an Exequatur. I told him this could not be
given, that it was only in the ports of the US. They
were entitled to Consuls, and that if France should
have a consul at Kentucky England and Spain
would soon demand the same, and we should have
all our interior country filled with foreign agents.
He acquiesced and asked me to return the
commission and his note, which I did. But he
desired that I would give Michaud a letter of
introduction for Governor Shelby. I sent him one a
day or two after. He now observes to me that in
that letter I speak of him as a person of botanical
and natural pursuits, but that he wished the
Governor to view him as something more, as a
French citizen possessing his confidence. I took
back the latter, and wrote another.
Source
“Jefferson’s Minute of Conversation with Genet.”
1897. In Annual Report of the American

John Robison, Proofs of a Conspiracy

Historical Association for the Year 1896. 2 vols.
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1:
984–985.

John Robison, Proofs of a Conspiracy (1797)
Scottish professor John Robison’s sensational exposé
of the Illuminati was enormously influential in
America, from the Federalist writers of the early
republic to the anti-Masonic movement of the nineteenth century. Perhaps more surprising is that the
book is still in print today and remains a founding
plank in all manner of conspiratorial writings on the
Masons in general and the Illuminati in particular.
The Association of which I have been speaking
is the Order of the ILLUMINATI, founded, in 1775,
by Dr. Adam Weishaupt, professor of Canon law
in the university of Inglostadt, and abolished in
1786 by the Elector of Bavaria, but revived
immediately after, under another name and in a
different form, all over Germany. It was again
detected, and seemingly broken up; but it had by
this time taken so deep root that it still subsists
without being detected, and has spread into all
countries of Europe. It took its first rise among
the Free Masons, but is totally different from
Free Masonry. It was not, however, the mere
protection gained by the secrecy of the Lodges
that gave occasion to it, but it arose naturally from
the corruptions that had gradually crept into that
fraternity, the violence of the party spirit which
pervaded it, and from the total uncertainty and
darkness that hangs over the whole of that
mysterious Association [ . . .].
The great aim professed by the Order is to
make men happy; and the means professed to be
employed, as the only and surely effective, is
making them good; and this is to be brought about
by enlightening the mind, and freeing it from the
dominion of superstition and prejudices. This
purpose is effected by its producing a just and
steady morality. This done, and becoming
universal, there can be little doubt but that the
peace of society will be the consequence,—that
government, subordination, and all the

disagreeable coercions of civil governments will
be unnecessary,—and that the society may go on
peacably in a state of perfect liberty and equality.
[ . . .] The [true] aim of the Order is not to
enlighten the mind of man, and show him his
moral obligations, and by the practice of his duties
to make society peacable [ . . .] but to get rid of
the coercion which must be employed in place of
Morality, that the innocent may be robbed with
impunity by the idle and profligate poor. [ . . .]
Their first and immediate aim is to get the
possession of riches, power, and influence,
without industry; they want to abolish
Christianity; and the dissolute manners and
universal profligacy will procure them the
adherence of all the wicked, and enable them to
overturn all the civil governments of Europe; after
which they will think of farther conquests, and
extend their operations to the other quarters of
the globe, till they have reduced mankind to the
state of one undistinguishable chaotic mass. [ . . .]
That the Illuminati and other hidden Cosmopolitical had some influence in bringing about the
French Revolution, or at least in accelerating it,
can hardly be doubted. [ . . .] Nothing can more
convincingly demonstrate the early intentions of a
party, and this a great party, in France to overturn
the constitution completely, and plant a
democracy or oligarchy on its ruins. The
Illuminati had no other object. They accounted all
Princes usurpers and tyrants, and all privileged
orders as their abbettors. They intended to
establish a government of Morality, as they called
it, [ . . .] where talents and character (to be
estimated by their own scale, and by themselves)
should alone lead to preferment. They meant to
abolish the law which protected property
accumulated by long continued and successful
industry, and to prevent for the future any such
accumulation. The intended to establish universal
Liberty and Equality, the imprescriptible Rights
of Man. [ . . .] And, as necessary preparations for
all this, they intended to root out all the religion
and ordinary morality, and even to break the
bonds of domestic life, by destroying the
veneration for marriage-vows, and by taking the
777

John Robison, Proofs of a Conspiracy

education of children out of the hands of the
parents. This was all that the Illuminati could
teach, and THIS WAS PRECISELY WHAT FRANCE
HAS DONE. [ . . .]
Hence it has arisen that the French aimed, in
the very beginning, at overturning the whole
world. In all the revolutions of other countries,
the schemes and plots have extended no further
than the nation where they took their rise. But
here we have seen that they take in the whole
world. They have repeatedly declared this in their
manifestos, and they have declared it by their
conduct. This is the very aim of the Illuminati.—
Hence too may be explained how the revolution
took place almost in a moment in every part of
France. The revolutionary societies were early
formed, and were working in secret before the
opening of the National Assembly, and the whole
nation changed, and changed again, and again, as
if by beat of drum. Those duly initiated in this
mystery of iniquity were ready everywhere at a
call. And we see Weishaupt’s wish accomplished
in an unexpected degree, and the debates in a
club giving laws to solemn assemblies of the
nation, and all France bending the neck to the
city of Paris. The members of the club are the
Illuminati, and so are a great part of their
correspondants. [ . . .] The famous Jacobin Club
was just one of these Lodges as has been already
observed. [ . . .]
We may also gather from what we have seen,
that all declamations on universal philanthropy
are dangerous. Their natural immediate effect on
the mind is to increase the discontents of the
unfortunate, and of those of the laborious ranks of
life. No one, even of the Illuminators, will deny
that these ranks must be filled, if society exists in
any degree of cultivation whatever, and that there
will always be a greater number of men who have
no farther prospect. Surely it is unkind to put
such men continually in mind of a state in which
they might be at their ease. [ . . .]
When we see how eagerly the Illuminati
endeavoured to insinuate their Brethren into all
offices which gave them influence on the public
mind, and particularly into seminars of education,
778

we should be particularly careful to prevent them,
and ought to examine with anxious attention the
manner of thinking of all who offer themselves for
teachers of youth. There is no part of the secret
correspondence of Spartacus [Weishaupt] and his
Associates, in which we see more varied and artful
methods for securing pupils, than in his own
conduct respecting the students in the University,
and the injunctions he gives to others. [ . . .]
Weishaupt undoubtedly thought that the
principles of civil anarchy would be easiest
inculcated on minds that had already shaken off
the restraints of Religion, and entered into habits
of sensual indulgence. [ . . .]
It is a great misfortune undoubtedly to feel
ourselves in a situation which makes us damp the
enjoyment of life with so much suspicion. But the
history of mankind shows us that many great
revolutions have been produced by remote and
apparently frivolous causes. [ . . .] We know that
the enemy is working amongst us, and that there
are many appearances in these kingdoms which
strongly resemble the contrivance of this
dangerous Association. We know that before the
Order of the Illuminati was broken up by the
Elector of Bavaria, there were several Lodges in
Britain, and we may be certain that they are not
all broken up. [ . . .] I am very well informed that
there are several thousands of subscribing
Brethren in London alone, and we can hardly
doubt but that many of that number are well
advanced. The vocabulary also of the Illuminati is
current in certain societies among us. [ . . .]
Seeing that there are such grounds of
apprehension, I think that we have cause to be on
our guard, and that every man who has enjoyed
the sweets of British liberty should be very
anxious to preserve it. We should discourage all
secret assemblies, which afford opportunities to
the disaffected, and all conversations which foster
any notions of political perfection, and create
hankerings after unattainable happiness. These
only increase the discontents of the unfortunate,
the idle, and the worthless.—Above all, we should
be careful to discourage and check immorality
and licentiousness in every shape. For this will of

Alien and Sedition Acts

itself subvert every government, and will subject
us to the vile tyranny of the mob.
If there has ever been a season in which it was
proper to call upon the public instructors of the
nation to exert themselves in the cause of Religion
and of Virtue, it is surely the present.
Sources
Robinson, John. 1797. Proofs of a Conspiracy
against All the Religions and Governments of
Europe, Carried On in the Secret Meetings of
Free Masons, Illuminati, and Reading Societies.
Edinburgh: N.p.
Davis, David Brian, ed. 1971. The Fear of
Conspiracy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Alien and Sedition Acts (1798)
During the revolutionary climate of the 1790s, the
Alien and Sedition Acts instituted both an attitude of
suspiciousness toward foreigners and a fear of foreign
plots. Their pretext was concerns about the activities
of the French government and navy, but they were
directed more specifically at curbing the influence of
foreign-born Jeffersonian anti-Federalists. Although
the Alien Act was never invoked, the Sedition Act was
used to curtail the freedom of federalist opponents of
President John Adams.
The Alien Act
25 June 1798
An Act Concerning Aliens
SECTION 1. Be it enacted by the Senate and
the House of Representatives of the United States
of America in Congress assembled, That it shall
be lawful for the President of the United States at
any time during the continuance of this act, to
order all such aliens as he shall judge dangerous
to the peace and safety of the United States, or
shall have reasonable grounds to suspect are
concerned in any treasonable or secret
machinations against the government thereof, to
depart out of the territory of the United States,
within such time as shall be expressed in such
order, which order shall be served on such alien
by delivering him a copy thereof, or leaving the
same at his usual abode, and returned to the

office of the Secretary of State, by the marshal or
other person to whom the same shall be directed.
And in case any alien, so ordered to depart, shall
be found at large within the United States after
the time limited in such order for his departure,
and not having obtained a license from the
President to reside therein, or having obtained
such license shall not have conformed thereto,
every such alien shall, on conviction thereof, be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding three years,
and shall never after be admitted to become a
citizen of the United States. Provided always, and
be it further enacted, that if any alien so ordered
to depart shall prove to the satisfaction of the
President, by evidence to be taken before such
person or persons as the President shall direct,
who are for that purpose hereby authorized to
administer oaths, that no injury or danger to the
United States will arise from suffering such alien
to reside therein, the President may grant a
license to such alien to remain within the United
States for such time as he shall judge proper, and
at such place as he may designate. And the
President may also require of such alien to enter
into a bond to the United States, in such penal
sum as he may direct, with one or more sufficient
sureties to the satisfaction of the person
authorized by the President to take the same,
conditioned for the good behavior of such alien
during his residence in the United States, and not
violating his license, which license the President
may revoke, whenever he shall think proper.
SEC. 2. And be it further enacted, That it shall
be lawful for the President of the United States,
whenever he may deem it necessary for the public
safety, to order to be removed out of the territory
thereof, any alien who may or shall be in prison in
pursuance of this act, and to cause to be arrested
and sent out of the United States such of those
aliens as shall have been ordered to depart
therefrom and shall not have obtained a license as
aforesaid, in all cases where, in the opinion of the
President, the public safety requires a speedy
removal. And if any alien so removed or sent out
of the United States by the President shall
voluntarily return thereto, unless by permission of
779

William Manning, “The Key of Liberty”

the President of the United States, such alien on
conviction thereof, shall be imprisoned so long as,
in the opinion of the President, the public safety
may require. [ . . .]
The Sedition Act
14 July 1798
An Act in Addition to the Act, Entitled “An Act
for the Punishment of Certain Crimes Against the
United States.”
SECTION 1. Be it enacted by the Senate and
House of Representatives of the United States of
America, in Congress assembled, That if any
persons shall unlawfully combine or conspire
together, with intent to oppose any measure or
measures of the government of the United States,
which are or shall be directed by proper authority,
or to impede the operation of any law of the
United States, or to intimidate or prevent any
person holding a place or office in or under the
government of the United States, from
undertaking, performing or executing his trust or
duty, and if any person or persons, with intent as
aforesaid, shall counsel, advise or attempt to
procure any insurrection, riot, unlawful assembly,
or combination, whether such conspiracy,
threatening, counsel, advice, or attempt shall have
the proposed effect or not, he or they shall be
deemed guilty of a high misdemeanor, and on
conviction, before any court of the United States
having jurisdiction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding five thousand dollars, and by
imprisonment during a term not less than six
months nor exceeding five years; and further, at
the discretion of the court may be holden to find
sureties for his good behaviour in such sum, and
for such time, as the said court may direct.
SEC. 2. And be it farther enacted, That if any
person shall write, print, utter or publish, or shall
cause or procure to be written, printed, uttered or
published, or shall knowingly and willingly assist or
aid in writing, printing, uttering or publishing any
false, scandalous and malicious writing or writings
against the government of the United States, or
either house of the Congress of the United States,
or the President of the United States, with intent to
780

defame the said government, or either house of the
said Congress, or the said President, or to bring
them, or either of them, into contempt or
disrepute; or to excite against them, or either or
any of them, the hatred of the good people of the
United States, or to stir up sedition within the
United States, or to excite any unlawful
combinations therein, for opposing or resisting any
law of the United States, or any act of the
President of the United States, done in pursuance
of any such law, or of the powers in him vested by
the constitution of the United States, or to resist,
oppose, or defeat any such law or act, or to aid,
encourage or abet any hostile designs of any
foreign nation against United States, their people
or government, then such person, being thereof
convicted before any court of the United States
having jurisdiction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding two thousand dollars, and by
imprisonment not exceeding two years. [ . . .]
Source
U.S. Statutes at Large, vol. 1, p. 566 ff.

William Manning, “The Key of Liberty:
Shewing the Causes Why a Free Government
Has Always Failed and a Remedy against It”
(1799)
William Manning’s writings present some of the
earliest American anticapitalist arguments. Writing as a Laborer, Manning sought to lay bare the
conspiratorial machinations of the wealthy “few” to
exploit the rightful earnings of the working “many.”
His work was never published during his lifetime.
To Show How the Few and Many Differ in
Their Ideas of Interest
“In the sweat of thy face shalt thou get thy
bread until thou return to the ground” is the
irreversible sentence of heaven on man for his
rebellion. And there is scarcely anything more
terrible to human nature than to be sentenced to
hard labor during life—especially if one is not
brought up to it in youth. Yet it is absolutely
necessary that a large majority of the world should
labor or we should not subsist. For labor is the
sole parent of all property. The land yieldeth

Jedidiah Morse, A Sermon, Exhibiting the Present Dangers

nothing without it, and there is no food, clothing,
shelter, vessel, or any necessary of life but what
costs labor and is generally estimated valuable
according to what labor it costs. Therefore no
person can possess property without laboring
unless he gets it by force or craft, fraud or
fortune, out of the earnings of others.
Source
Merrill, Michael, and Sean Wilentz, eds. 1993. The
Key of Liberty: The Life and Democratic Writings
of William Manning, “A Laborer,” 1747–1814.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 135–136.

Jedidiah Morse, A Sermon,
Exhibiting the Present Dangers (1799)
In the fevered atmosphere of the late 1790s, the
New England minister Jedidiah Morse delivered a
number of sermons that promoted a conspiratorial
take on events. In particular he highlighted the
work of John Robison, a Scottish professor whose
Proofs of a Conspiracy (1797) brought sensational
stories about the supposedly unlimited power of the
Illuminati to an English-speaking audience.
Our dangers are of two kinds, those which
affect our religion, and those which affect our
government. They are, however, so closely allied
that they cannot, with propriety, be separated.
The foundations which support the interests of
Christianity, are also necessary to support a free
and equal government like our own. In all those
countries where there is little or no religion, or a
very gross or corrupt one, as in Mahometan and
Pagan countries, there you will find, with scarcely
a single exception, arbitrary and tyrannical
governments, gross ignorance and wickedness,
and deplorable wretchedness among the people.
To the kindly influence of Christianity we owe
that degree of civil freedom, and political and
social happiness which mankind now enjoy. In
proportion as the genuine effects of Christianity
are diminished in any nation, either through
unbelief, or the corruption of its doctrines, or the
neglect of its institutions; in the same proportion
will the people of that nation recede from the

blessings of genuine freedom, and approximate
the miseries of complete despotism. I hold this to
be a truth confirmed by experience. If so, it
follows, that all efforts made to destroy the
foundations of our holy religion, ultimately tend
to the subversion also of our political freedom and
happiness. Whenever the pillars of Christianity
shall be overthrown, our present republican forms
of government, and all the blessings which fall
from them, must fall with them.
[ . . .] It has long been suspected that Secret
Societies, under the influence and direction of
France, holding principles subversive of our
religion and government, existed somewhere in
this country. This suspicion was cautiously
suggested from this desk, on the day of the last
National Fast, with a view to excite a just alarm,
and to put you on your guard against their secret
artifices. Evidence that this suspicion was well
founded, has since been accumulating, and I have
now in my possession complete and indubitable
proof that such societies do exist, and have for
many years existed, in the United States. I have,
my brethren, an official authenticated list of the
names, ages, places of nativity, professions, etc. of
the officers and members of a Society of
Illuminati, (or as they are now more generally and
properly styled Illuminees) consisting of one
hundred members, instituted in Virginia, by the
Grand Orient of FRANCE. This society has a
deputy, whose name is on the list, who resides at
the Mother Society in France, to communicate
from thence all needful information and
instruction. [ . . .] The members are chiefly
Emigrants from France and St. Domingo, with
the addition of a few Americans, and some from
almost all the nations of Europe. A letter which
enclosed this list, an authentic copy of which I
also possess, contains evidence of the existence of
a society of a like nature, and probably of more
ancient date, at New-York, out of which have
sprung fourteen others, scattered we know not
where over the United States. Two societies of the
some kind, but of an inferior order, have been
instituted by the society first mentioned, one in
Virginia, and the other at St. Domingo. How
781

Abraham Bishop, Proofs of a Conspiracy

many of equal rank they have established among
us I am not informed.
You will perceive, my brethren, from this
concise statement of facts, that we have in truth
secret enemies, not a few, scattered through our
country; how many and, except in three or four
instances, in what places we know not; enemies
whose professed design is to subvert and overturn
our holy religion and our free and excellent
government. And the pernicious fruits of their
insidious and secret efforts, must be visible to
every eye not obstinately closed or blinded by
prejudice. Among these fruits may be reckoned
our unhappy and threatening political divisions;
the unceasing abuse of our wise and faithful
rulers; the virulent opposition to some of the laws
of our country, and the measures of the Supreme
Executive; the Pennsylvania insurrection; the
industrious circulation of baneful and corrupting
books, and the consequent wonderful spread of
infidelity, impiety and immorality; the arts made
use of to revive ancient prejudices, and cherish
party spirit, by concealing or disguising the truth
and propagating falsehoods; and lastly, the
apparently systematic endeavours made to
destroy, not only the influence and support, but
the official existence of the Clergy. [ . . .]
And what have they [the Clergy] done to
provoke this hostility? Why they have “preached
politics.” This, so far as I know, is the princip[al],
if not the only, charge alleged against them. But is
this any new crime? No; it is as old as Christianity;
nay it is as old as the priesthood itself. [ . . .] And
yet, for doing what only twenty years ago they
were called upon to perform as a duty, they are
now censured and abused, and represented as an
expensive, useless, nay even, noxious body of
men. In some of our newspapers, which are read
by too many with more avidity, and more faith
than the Holy Bible, they are continually
reproached and vilified; and every low artifice is
used to lessen their influence and usefulness; and
what is deeply to be lamented, this poison is
greedily swallowed, and assiduously disseminated
by some even, who profess to be the warm friends
and supporters of Christianity, and of the
782

Christian Ministry. Little are these good people
aware of what they are doing. Little do they
believe that, blinded by their prejudices, they are
in fact aiding with all their influence, the
adversaries of religion in subverting its
foundations; that they are acting a part directly
contrary to their prayers and their professions. I
would to GOD the veil might be speedily torn from
the eyes of such Christians, as are ignorantly
assisting them to pull down the pillars which
support the Christian fabric, lest they too late
deplore their folly amidst its ruins!
The contest which now engages the attention,
and fills with fearful apprehensions all the
civilized world, is singular in its kind. “It is a
contest of liberty against despotism; of property
against rapine; of religion against impiety; of
civilized society against the destroyers of all social
order.” These terms feebly express the calamities
which the principles and the arms of France have
produced in their baleful progress; and which the
wounds of a bleeding world will attest.
Sources
Morse, Jedidiah. 1799. A Sermon, Exhibiting the
Present Dangers, and Consequent Duties of the
Citizens of the United States of America.
Delivered at Charlestown, April 25, 1799. The
Day of the National Fast. Charlestown, MA: N.p.
Davis, David Brian, ed. 1971. The Fear of
Conspiracy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Abraham Bishop, Proofs of a Conspiracy
(1802)
In Proofs of a Conspiracy Abraham Bishop attacks
Federalism as a conspiracy against the liberties of
ordinary Americans and a betrayal of the spirit of
the Revolution and Christianity. Bishop sees the
idea of centrally concentrated power in the hands
of the elite as an affront against the “poor man’s
government,” and as the first stage of a return to
secretive, aristocratic tyranny.
Professor Robinson undertook the gigantic task
of proving a conspiracy against all the religions
and governments in the world: I am contented
with a small section of his subject.

Abraham Bishop, Proofs of a Conspiracy

My aim will be, to place charge of infidel
conspiracy, where it ought to rest, in comparing
which I shall pass rapidly, and without much
ceremony, through the solemn forms, in which
religion is presented, in order to arrive at the
substance; and in examining this shall occasionally,
and without much sensibility, advert to the
passions and arts opposed to my process; and after
fixing the character of federal religion, shall follow
it through the political course, which it has taken
from the infancy of our government to the day of
the date of these presents—shall with much
coolness call some classes of men hypocrites, who
have passed for saints—and shall show that
whether republicanism means something or
nothing; yet that the allusions and distant hints of
republicans about the existence of an hypocritical
northern phalanx meant something.—And from
premises thus constructed shall attempt to prove,
that Christianity and the government of the
United States have a constant, powerful, and
efficient enemy in the New-England Union of
Church and State.
[ . . .]
Introductory View of this Conspiracy
Taking nature for our guide we shall find the
unionists conspiring against the poor man’s
government under this influence of the same
passions, which led them to conspire against the
poor man’s religion.
The history of the world presents two classes of
men, as distinct in their motives and means, as if
they were of an entire different species of being,
and formed of different materials.
1st. The body of mankind, honest and
industrious, contented with a little, labouring hard
to support a class of men, who are always
promising to bring them a degree of happiness
and independence, which they have never seen
and never will see, if they trust such promises;
fighting when they are told that religion or their
rights are in danger; trembling before courtmartials; mounting the scaffold, when the pride of
a courtier or the petulance of midshipman
requires it; dying when they are bid to die; drawn
by the force of fraud, falsehood and passion, from

the mild government of their heavenly Father,
under the dominion of men, who fear no power
but that of death, and no enemies but the intrepid
asserters of the eternal rights of man.
2nd. The lordly tyrants of the world, known by
different titles; the well-born, scorning the lowly
talk of the Saviour, who had a feeling of human
infirmity, because he took upon him our natures.
These great men know not the value of labour,
the stings of poverty, nor the sense of danger, nor
the tenderness of affection, which binds together
those, whose sphere of action is limited. These
tyrants bind heavy burdens on the people; talk of
millions of debt with as little concern as the
people do of pence; declare war with perfect
composure, and assume on themselves to answer
for the blood of the slain, as if they considered the
books of record to be forever closed, and as if a
season would never arrive, when the sea would
give up its dead. They enter peaceable families
and drag their hopes into the field; desolate
villages and destroy their thousands, and when
vengeance says it is enough, they pray that swords
may be turned into ploughshares and spears into
pruning-hooks, and that nations may learn war no
more. The war serves as an apology for an
increase of taxation, and having before taxed all
which the labour of man produces, they tax the
light which heaven bestows, and if discontent
arises by reason of oppression, another war is
declared in order to hush the tumult.
Thus wars are excited under pretence of
serving the kingdom of peace, and all the rights of
mankind are violated under a pretence of
advancing those rights. Every thing has always
been in danger; these men have affected to avert
the danger, and the state of things has, under
their management, been always growing worse:
yet these pilots, who are always steering among
the rocks, are still at helm, and multitudes of
lifeless men, whose all is at stake, say, “let the ship
sink, we are only passengers”—and this stupid
confidence is among the “steady habits,” which
receive the constant eulogy of the great men.
Such is the history of the world—on the one
hand an easy, unsuspicious confidence, and on the
783

David Bernard, Light on Masonry

other a bold and daring assumption of all power,
human and divine; and through these two causes
the earth has been filled with artificial miseries,
and the souls of those, who have slain, have been
crying, “How long, O Lord, dost thou not judge
and avenge our blood on them that dwelt on the
earth.”
When our declaration of independence was
penned, all these facts were known and
recognized by our people, and Britain was
expressly charged with tyranny, and we called
ourselves the oppressed. In that day we were
resolved to be free and to have a republican
government, in which the people were once to be
foreign, and to take in charge their own rights. By
the government, against which I claim that the
unionists have conspired, is intended the
government for which our revolution was
effected; not that republic, which under Mr.
Adams, meant any thing or nothing; nor any
particular set of men, composing an
administration; but that political system, which
has been always denominated republican—By the
conspiracy charged is intended that portion and
kind of enmity against such a government, (arising
from the fame motives, and conducted by as
insidious means) which animated the court of St.
James and British army to conspire against our
independence.
Source
Bishop, Abraham. 1802. Proofs of a Conspiracy,
against Christianity, and the Government of the
United States Exhibited in Several Views of the
Union of the Church and State in New England.
Hartford, CT: J. Babcock.

David Bernard, Light on Masonry (1829)
Light on Masonry, a collection of documents compiled by David Bernard, set out the case against
freemasonry in general, and the abduction of
William Morgan in particular. It became a central
text for the anti-Masonic movement of the 1830s. In
the following section from the introduction,
Bernard explains why he felt compelled to expose
the secrets of the organization.
784

I soon became convinced that the peace of
society, the salvation of my country, the present
and eternal happiness of my fellow men, and the
glory of God, required the destruction of the
institution. To accomplish this, I was confident
but one effectual method could be adopted, and
this was to make a full disclosure of its secrets.
[ . . .]
But am I justifiable in pursuing this course? Will
the law of God approve the violation of such
solemn oaths? Passing by the arguments which
might be adduced from the fact that the
obligations were taken without a previous
knowledge of their character—the assurances that
they were not to interfere with my political or
religious sentiments, when they are diametrically
opposite to both—that I swore fealty to a
professedly ancient, moral, benevolent, and
righteous institution, when it proves to be
“modern, corrupt, selfish, and unholy.” I rest the
question upon the principles of moral obligation,
by which I expect to be judged, and by which I
must stand or fall. Are the oaths of Free Masonry,
then, congenial with the duties which I owe to
God and my fellow men? [ . . .] Moral obligation
requires me to keep such secrets and such only as
are calculated to promote God’s glory and the best
good of community; and my swearing does not
effect the obligation at all. It also requires me to
reveal those secrets, the keeping of which have a
tendency to mar or prevent His glory and the best
good of my neighbour; and my swearing to keep
them does not, cannot, render the obligation void;
for instance, if I had sworn to keep secret the
intention of a highway-man to rob my neighbour’s
house and murder his family; to keep secret a plot
against my country, the government of which is
founded upon the principles of truth and justice;
to keep secret a grand conspiracy formed by a
powerful society, the object of which was, like that
of the illuminati, to abolish government and social
order and extinguish Christianity—as the keeping
of these secrets would be prejudicial to the
interests of my neighbour, to the safety of my
country, and the glory of God, the principles of
moral obligation would require me to reveal them.

Anti-Masonic Convention

If I had sworn to assist the robber, to unite in the
plot, or conspiracy, my refusal to act in either case,
simply, would not fulfil the duties which I should
owe to my neighbour, my country, or my God. So I
did not make known the intention of the robber,
expose the plot, or reveal the conspiracy, I should
be guilty of a violation of moral obligation.
It will not be necessary here to inquire whether
the oaths to keep secrets of a brother, with or
without exception, to deliver a companion ‘right
or wrong,’ to ‘take vengeance on the traitors of
Masonry,’ to ‘sacrifice all those who reveal the
secrets of the order,’ are in harmony with the
Divine law—but whether the principles of moral
obligation require the keeping or revealing of
Masonic secrets?
It will be readily admitted that the existence of
the institution depends upon the keeping of its
secrets inviolate. It will follow, then, that if the
existence of the institution is necessary, or has a
tendency to promote God’s glory and the well
being of society, the principles of moral
obligations require me to keep its secrets, and by
revealing them I am guilty of moral perjury! And
on the other hand, if the institution is corrupt, has
an evil tendency, is opposed to the order and well
being of society and the glory of God, I am under
moral obligation to break my oaths and reveal its
secrets to the world, that it may come to an end.
My refusing to meet with or support the
institution, is not sufficient; I must renounce
fealty to the order, reveal its secrets, oppose its
influence, and use my exertions to destroy it, or I
am guilty of a violation of moral obligation.
Let the reader carefully and thoroughly
examine the following documents, and he will
discover that Free Masonry, as system, is dark,
unfruitful, selfish, demoralising, blasphemous,
murderous, anti-republican, and anti-Christian—
opposed to the glory of God and the good of
mankind; and hence that the compiler in bursting
asunder the bands of the fraternity, and
publishing their secrets to the world, is doing no
more than is required by the principles of moral
obligation—is fulfilling the duties which he owes
to God and his fellow men.

Source
Bernard, David. 1829. Light on Masonry: A
Collection of All the Most Important Documents
on the Subject of Speculative Free Masonry.
Utica, NY: William Williams.

Anti-Masonic Convention (1830)
At the first national Anti-Masonic Convention held
in Philadelphia in 1830, the delegates called for various inquiries into the nature of freemasonry in general and the disappearance of ex-Mason William
Morgan in particular. The report on Morgan concluded that the Masons were guilty of a far-reaching
conspiracy to abduct and murder Morgan.
Philadelphia, Saturday, September 11, 1830
Ninety-six delegates to the United States Antimasonic Convention, assembled in the District
Court Room, in the city of Philadelphia, on the
11th of September, 1830, at 12 o’clock, m.
[ . . .]
Mr. Phelps, from the committee, to lay before
this Convention, the subjects proper for its
consideration, reported in part, by the following
resolutions, viz:
[ . . .]
3rd. Resolved, that a Committee be appointed,
consisting of all the seceding masons belonging to
this Convention, to report a summary of
freemasonry; embracing the prominent points in
each degree, sufficient to show the nature,
principles, and tendency of the institution; and
that the correctness of the same be certified by
each member of the Committee, according to the
number of degrees he has taken.
4th Resolved, that a Committee of five be
appointed, to inquire and report, when, where, and
for what purposes, freemasonry was first instituted;
what has been its progress; where it has flourished
most; and what is now the most probable number
of the fraternity, in each country where it exists.
5th Resolved, that a Committee of five be
appointed, to inquire and report what have been
the pretensions of freemasonry, and how
supported the facts.
785

Anti-Masonic Convention

6th Resolved, that a Committee of five be
appointed, to take into consideration the true
nature of masonic oaths or obligations; and to
report whether they are, or are not, religiously,
morally, or legally binding; and whether they are,
or are not, in collision with the higher obligations
of duty and allegiance, which every good citizen is
under, to support the constitution and laws of his
country.
7th Resolved, that a Committee of five be
appointed, to examine the evidence, as to the
truth of the disclosures contained in a work
published by Elder David Bernard, entitled,
“Light on Masonry;” and to report thereon.
8th Resolved, that a Committee of five be
appointed, to report a succinct and lucid account
of the abduction and murder of William Morgan;
and of the conduct, and measures adopted by the
fraternity, jointly and individually, to prevent a
conviction in courts of justice, of their more
prominent fellow masons, in that abduction and
murder.
9th Resolved, that a Committee of five be
appointed, to consider and report, whether an
adherence to the oaths or obligations of
freemasonry, does or does not, disqualify a man
for the impartial discharge of all important offices
in the gift of the people, according to the true
nature of our free institutions.
10th Resolved, that a Committee of five be
appointed, to report upon the effects of
freemasonry of the Christian religion.
11th Resolved, that a Committee of six be
appointed, to consider the nature and spirit of
anti-masonry, from the disclosures of Professor
Robinson, and the Abbe Barruel, to the present
time; the arguments used by freemasons, in
support of their institution; and the means
resorted to by the fraternity, to prevent inquiry
into the principles, nature, and tendency of the
order, and to report thereon.
12th Resolved, that a Committee of five be
appointed, to report what measures can
constitutionally and properly be used, to
effectuate the extinction of freemasonry; to guard
against its revival; and to secure our free
786

institutions against the future insidious assaults of
all secret societies; and to report an address on
those subjects to the people of the United States.
13th Resolved, that a Committee of five be
appointed, to prepare and report resolutions,
expressive of the sentiments of this Convention,
on the subject of freemasonry; and that each
member of this body be requested to aid said
Committee, by furnishing such resolutions as he
may think proper.
14th Resolved, that a Committee of five be
appointed, to consider and report the best system
of a national correspondence of anti-masons, for
the sole purpose of diffusing information
extensively on the subject of freemasonry, and of
other secret combinations, against the equal rights
of mankind and our free institutions.
[ . . .]
It will strike any one, on hearing a recital of the
facts connected with the abduction of William
Morgan, that the combination to effect that
measure, must have been very extensive,
embracing a large number of individuals. The
judicial examinations of the subjects have brought
out very many names as connected in a nearer or
more remote degree, with the transaction at some
stage of its progress. The bare seizure and
transportation of a man from such a distance,
rendered the employment of many agents, a
matter of absolute necessity, and it is now well
known that many knew of it, who took no active
part in the infraction of the laws. It was probably
known to numbers of the lodge-going masons, in
several of the western counties of New York, that
some measures were contemplated to be taken
for the suppression of Morgan’s intended
publication; and it has been judicially proven, that
measures, which contemplated the use of
violence, to effect this object, were matters of
discussion among masons in the lodge room.
It would be naturally supposed, that a
conspiracy, so wide spread, the execution and
knowledge of which was confided to so many
individuals, would not oppose formidable
difficulties to a complete exposure by judicial
investigation. In the history of crime, those which

Anti-Masonic Convention

employ the most accomplices, are usually the
easiest of detection, particularly if the agency of
some partake but slightly of guilt. But such was
not the case in the investigation of this violation of
the laws, and the difficulties which were
encountered, will be hereafter noticed.
[ . . .]
Having thus given a brief history of the
abduction of William Morgan, and noticed the
trials growing out of that transaction, it now
becomes the duty of your committee, to furnish
a statement of the conduct and measures of
numbers of the masonic fraternity, to prevent the
conviction of those implicated in these gross
violations of the laws of the land. Appalling as is
the conviction which is pressed upon us by the
history of that abduction, that hundreds of
respectable men, in the western counties of the
state of New York, could be found, who would
be willing to violate the laws of the state, and the
sacredness of private property, personal liberty,
and human life, to prevent the publication of the
secrets of free masonry, yet, it would be
infinitely more alarming, if it should be found,
that great numbers of the members of that
fraternity, had made use of every possible device
to prevent the discovery of a high handed
offence, and to obstruct the administration of
justice, and the due execution of the laws. The
first, however extensive the combination may
have been, was but a single outrage, and like
hundreds of other fearful crimes, might have
been punished and forgotten, and the public
have felt secure in the protection of the laws, in
witnessing the unobstructed execution of their
penalties. The latter, unhinging the whole
administration of justice, would exhibit a state of
facts deeply alarming to a community, who
eminently repose upon the laws under which
they live for protection, and rely undoubtingly
upon their due and impartial administration.
When rumours of these outrages first became
public, the citizens of the community, in which
they were perpetrated, felt themselves called
upon to investigate how it was, that a peaceable
citizen should be forcibly seized in a populous

village, and transported against his will, one
hundred and fifty miles, through a thickly settled
country. As worthy of a free government, they
deemed themselves bound to ascertain why, and
by whom, a fellow citizen, enjoying the same
privileges, was abstracted from the protection of
the laws, under circumstances which created
well grounded suspicions of a horrible fate. The
inquiries for information in relation to Morgan,
were answered by taunts, reproaches, and
ridicule. At first, the members of the fraternity
were bold enough, openly to declare, “That if
Morgan had been put to death, his fate was no
more than he deserved; he had forfeited his life.”
These declarations were made by perhaps
hundreds of freemasons, within two months after
the abduction, and there is scarce an individual,
who at that early period took any interest in the
investigation, but can call to mind distinctly,
many such declarations, made by respectable
and influential men.
When intimations were thrown out that an
appeal would be made to the laws, more than one
freemason has been heard to say, that the judges
were masons, the sheriffs were masons, and the
jurymen would be masons, and set at defiance the
requirements of justice.
There seems to have been a determination on
the part of the fraternity, not only to suppress all
information in relation to the outrages, but even
to repress inquiries and questionings, which might
tend to elucidate it. Individuals who ventured to
make remarks which such an infraction of the
laws were calculated to elicit, were made the
subjects of unreasonable abuse, and vindictive
hostility, by the lodge-going members of the
fraternity. The public press, which has, in almost
every other instance of alarming crime, been
made in some measure the means of its
investigation, or at least of making public its
details, was, in this instance, with a single
exception at first awed into most slavish silence,
by the influence of freemasonry.
Source
Anti-Masonic Party. 1830. Proceedings of the AntiMasonic Convention. Philadelphia: J. P. Trimble.

787

Nat Turner, Confessions

Nat Turner, Confessions (1831)
Before it was crushed by the state militia, Nat
Turner’s slave revolt of 1831 killed about fifty
whites—and Turner had hoped that many more
would have joined his conspiracy of slaves. In his
published Confessions, Turner gives an account of
an uprising that was to haunt the imagination of
the slave-owning population.
Since the commencement of 1830, I had been
living with Mr. Joseph Travis, who was to me a
kind master, and placed the greatest confidence in
me: in fact, I had no cause to complain of his
treatment of me. On Saturday evening, the 20th
of August, it was agreed between Henry, Hark,
and myself, to prepare a dinner the next day for
the men we expected, and then to concert a plan,
as we had not yet determined on any. Hark, on
the following morning, brought a pig, and Henry
brandy, and being joined by Sam, Nelson, Will
and Jack, they prepared in the woods a dinner,
where, about three o’clock, I joined them [ . . .].
I saluted them on coming up, and asked Will
how came he there, he answered, his life was
worth no more than others, and his liberty as dear
to him. I asked him if he thought to obtain it? He
said he would, or lose his life. This was enough to
put him in full confidence. Jack, I knew, was only
a tool in the hands of Hark, it was quickly agreed
we should commence at home (Mr. J. Travis’) on
that night, and until we had armed and equipped
ourselves, and gathered sufficient force, neither
age nor sex was to be spared (which was invariably
adhered to). We remained at the feast, until about
two hours in the night, when we went to the
house and found Austin; they all went to the cider
press and drank, except myself. On returning to
the house Hark went to the door with an axe, for
the purpose of breaking it open, as we knew we
were strong enough to murder the family, if they
were awakened by the noise; but reflecting that it
might create an alarm in the neighborhood, we
determined to enter the house secretly, and
murder them whilst sleeping. Hark got a ladder
and set it against the chimney, on which I
ascended, and hoisting a window, entered and
788

came down stairs, unbarred the door, and
removed the guns from their places. It was then
observed that I must spill the first blood. On
which, armed with a hatchet, and accompanied by
Will, I entered my master’s chamber, it being
dark, I could not give a death blow, the hatchet
glanced from his head, he sprang from the bed
and called his wife, it was his last word, Will laid
him dead, with a blow of his axe, and Mrs. Travis
shared the same fate, as she lay in bed. The
murder of this family, five in number, was the
work of a moment, not one of them awoke; there
was a little infant sleeping in a cradle, that was
forgotten, until we had left the house and gone
some distance, when Henry and Will returned
and killed it; we got here, four guns that would
shoot and several old muskets, with a pound or
two of powder. We remained some time at the
barn, where we paraded; I formed them in a line
as soldiers, and [ . . .] marched them off to Mr.
Salthul Francis’, about six hundred yards distant.
Sam and Will went to the door and knocked. Mr.
Francis asked who was there, Sam replied it was
him, and he had a letter for him, on which he got
up and came to the door; they immediately seized
him, and dragging him out a little from the door,
he was dispatched by repeated blows on the head;
there was no other white person in the family. We
started from there for Mrs. Reese’s, maintaining
the most perfect silence on our march, where
finding the door unlocked, we entered, and
murdered Mrs. Reese in her bed, while sleeping;
her son awoke, but it was only to sleep the sleep
of death, he had only time to say who is that, and
he was no more. From Mrs. Reese’s we went to
Mrs. Turner’s, a mile distant, which we reached
about sunrise, on Monday morning. [ . . .]
‘Twas my object to carry terror and devastation
wherever we went [ . . .]. I sometimes got in sight
in time to see the work of death completed,
viewed the mangled bodies as they lay, in silent
satisfaction, and immediately started in quest of
other victims—Having murdered Mrs. Waller and
ten children, we started for Mr. William
Williams’—having killed him and two little boys
that were there; while engaged in this, Mrs.

President Andrew Jackson, “Veto Message Regarding the Bank of the United States”

Williams fled and got some distance from the
house, but she was pursued, overtaken, and
compelled to get up behind one of the company,
who brought her back, and after showing her the
mangled body of her lifeless husband, she was
told to get down and lay by his side, where she
was shot dead [ . . .].
Our number amounted now to fifty or sixty, all
mounted and armed with guns, axes, swords, and
clubs [ . . .]. We were met by a party of white
men, who had pursued our blood-stained track
[ . . .]. The white men, eighteen in number,
approached us in about one hundred yards, when
one of them fired [ . . .]. I then ordered my men
to fire and rush them; the few remaining stood
their ground until we approached within fifty
yards, when they fired and retreated [ . . .]. As I
saw them re-loading their guns, and more coming
up than I saw at first, and several of my bravest
men being wounded, the others became panick
struck and squandered over the field; the white
men pursued and fired on us several times [ . . .].
Source
Turner, Nat. 1831. The Confessions of Nat Turner,
the Leader of the Late Insurrection in
Southampton, Va. Baltimore: Thomas R. Gray.
Available at http://vi.uh.edu/pages/mintz/32.htm.

President Andrew Jackson, “Veto
Message Regarding the Bank of the
United States” (1832)
Andrew Jackson distrusted all banks—Nicholas
Biddle’s Second Bank of the United States in particular—because he believed they were controlled
by the conspiring forces of the moneyed elite and
were a private monopoly license to print money.
When Biddle and his colleagues submitted a bill to
recharter the bank, Jackson vetoed it.
WASHINGTON, July 10, 1832.
To the Senate.
[ . . .] A bank of the United States is in many
respects convenient for the Government and
useful to the people. Entertaining this opinion,
and deeply impressed with the belief that some of

the powers and privileges possessed by the existing
bank are unauthorized by the Constitution,
subversive of the rights of the States, and
dangerous to the liberties of the people, I felt it
my duty at an early period of my Administration to
call the attention of Congress to the practicability
of organizing an institution combining all its
advantages and obviating these objections. I
sincerely regret that in the act before me I can
perceive none of those modifications of the bank
charter which are necessary, in my opinion, to
make it compatible with justice, with sound policy,
or with the Constitution of our country.
The present corporate body, denominated the
president, directors, and company of the Bank of
the United States, will have existed at the time
this act is intended to take effect twenty years. It
enjoys an exclusive privilege of banking under the
authority of the General Government, a monopoly
of its favor and support, and, as a necessary
consequence, almost a monopoly of the foreign
and domestic exchange. The powers, privileges,
and favors bestowed upon it in the original
charter, by increasing the value of the stock far
above its par value, operated as a gratuity of many
millions to the stockholders. [ . . .]
Under such circumstances the bank comes
forward and asks a renewal of its charter for a
term of fifteen years upon conditions which not
only operate as a gratuity to the stockholders of
many millions of dollars, but will sanction any
abuses and legalize any encroachments.
Suspicions are entertained and charges are made
of gross abuse and violation of its charter. An
investigation unwillingly conceded and so restricted
in time as necessarily to make it incomplete and
unsatisfactory discloses enough to excite suspicion
and alarm. In the practices of the principal bank
partially unveiled, in the absence of important
witnesses, and in numerous charges confidently
made and as yet wholly uninvestigated there was
enough to induce a majority of the committee of
investigation—a committee which was selected
from the most able and honorable members of the
House of Representatives—to recommend a
suspension of further action upon the bill and a
789

William M. Gouge, A Short History of Paper Money

prosecution of the inquiry. As the charter had yet
four years to run, and as a renewal now was not
necessary to the successful prosecution of its
business, it was to have been expected that the
bank itself, conscious of its purity and proud of its
character, would have withdrawn its application for
the present, and demanded the severest scrutiny
into all its transactions. In their declining to do so
there seems to be an additional reason why the
functionaries of the Government should proceed
with less haste and more caution in the renewal of
their monopoly.
The bank is professedly established as an agent
of the executive branch of the Government, and
its constitutionality is maintained on that ground.
Neither upon the propriety of present action nor
upon the provisions of this act was the Executive
consulted. It has had no opportunity to say that it
neither needs nor wants an agent clothed with
such powers and favored by such exemptions.
There is nothing in its legitimate functions which
makes it necessary or proper. Whatever interest or
influence, whether public or private, has given
birth to this act, it can not be found either in the
wishes or necessities of the executive department,
by which present action is deemed premature,
and the powers conferred upon its agent not only
unnecessary, but dangerous to the Government
and country.
It is to be regretted that the rich and powerful
too often bend the acts of government to their
selfish purposes. [ . . .] If we can not at once, in
justice to interests vested under improvident
legislation, make our Government what it ought
to be, we can at least take a stand against all new
grants of monopolies and exclusive privileges,
against any prostitution of our Government to the
advancement of the few at the expense of the
many, and in favor of compromise and gradual
reform in our code of laws and system of political
economy.
Source
A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the
Presidents Prepared under the Direction of the
Joint Committee on Printing, of the House and
Senate Pursuant to an Act of the Fifty-Second

790

Congress of the United States. 1897. New York:
Bureau of National Literature. Available at
http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/presiden/veto/
ajveto01.htm.

William M. Gouge, A Short
History of Paper Money (1833)
In 1833, as large numbers of new banks began to
issue paper money in the United States, Jacksonian
economic theorist William M. Gouge published his
attack on notes and his defense of a specie standard.
The Banks are scattered through nearly all the
States and Territories which compose our Union;
but they may all be embraced in one view,
inasmuch as they all substitute paper for specie,
and credit for cash, and are all endowed with
privileges which individuals do not possess.
By their various operations, immediate and
remote, they must affect, for good or for evil,
every individual in the country. Banking is not a
local, temporary, or occasional cause. It is general
and permanent. Like the atmosphere, it presses
every where. Its effects are felt alike in the palace
and the hovel.
To the customs of trade which Banking
introduces, all are obliged to conform. A man
may, indeed, neither borrow money from the
banks, nor deposit money in their vaults: but if he
buys or sells it with the medium which they
furnish, and in all his contracts he must have
reference to the standard of value which they
establish. There is no legal disability to carrying
on commerce in the old fashioned safe way: but
the customs of Banking have introduced a
practical disability. It is no longer possible for the
merchant to buy and sell for ready money only, or
for real money. He must give and take credit, and
give and take paper money, or give up business.
Bank paper is not a legal tender in the
discharge of private debts: but it has become, in
point of fact, the only actual tender, and then the
sudden refusal of creditors to receive it would put
it out of the power of debtors to comply with their
engagements.

Samuel F.B. Morse, Conspiracy against the Liberties of the United States

Credit, the greatest rival of cash, is completely
controlled by the Banks, and distributed by them
as suits their discretion [ . . .]. These institutions
may contribute little to the production of wealth;
but they furnish the means to many for the
acquisition of wealth; they appear to be the chief
regulating cause of the present distribution of
wealth, and as such are entitled to particular
attention.
Not a few of those who have a personal interest
in the continuance of the system, acknowledge and
deplore the evil it produces. Indeed we have found
no men more sensible of these evils, than some of
the officers of Banks. They retain their offices on
the same principle that they would, if they lived in
England, retain offices under a Government they
could not approve. To the established system of a
country, whether political or commercial, men may
deem it expedient, perhaps believe it necessary, to
conform; but this need not prevent their discovery
the necessity for reformation. . . .
Paper money is the foundation of the American
Banking System. But, as, without a knowledge of
what is genuine, it is impossible to have a clear
conception of what is spurious, it will be necessary
to give a statement of the qualities and functions
of real money. . . .
Hence we find men, without scruple, incurring
debts which they have no prospect of paying.
[ . . .] Hence we find them, when on the very
verge of bankruptcy, embarrassing their friends by
prevailing on them to indorse notes and sign
custom-house bonds.
Instances not infrequently occur of men who
have failed once or twice, afterwards
accumulating great wealth. How few of these
honorably discharge their old debts by paying
twenty shillings in the pound!
How many evade the just demands of their
creditors, by privately transferring their property.
[ . . .] It is impossible, in the present condition of
society, to pass laws which will punish dishonest
insolvents, and not oppress the honest and
unfortunate. [ . . .] The standard of commercial
honesty can never be raised very high, while trade
is conducted on present principles.

Source
Gouge, William M. [1833] 1968. A Short History of
Paper Money and Banking in the United States to
Which Is Refixed an Inquiry into the Principles of
the System. Edited by Joseph Dorfman. New
York: Augustus M. Kelley, 2–9, 95.

Samuel F. B. Morse, Conspiracy against
the Liberties of the United States (1835)
Like his father Jedidiah Morse, Samuel F. B. Morse
was a man of letters and science who also felt compelled to warn his fellow Americans of what he perceived as a conspiracy against their liberties.
Where his father had preached of the dangers of
Masonic influences spreading out from the French
Revolution, Samuel Morse claimed that the threat
to the United States came from the conspiratorial
designs of the Roman Catholic Church.
And what now prevents the interference of
Catholics as a sect directly in the political
elections of the country? They are organized
under their priests: Is there any thing in their
religious principles to restrain them? [ . . .] Did
not the Pope interfere in Poland in the late
revolution, and through the priests command
submission to the tyranny of the Czar. At the
moment I am writing, are not monks and priests
leaders in the field of battle in Spain; in Portugal?
Is not the Pope encouraging the troops of Don
Miguel, and exciting priests and people to arms in
a civil contest? Has Popery abandoned its ever
busy meddling in the politics of the countries
where it obtains foothold?
Will it be said, that however officious in the old
countries, yet here, by some strange
metamorphosis, Popery has changed its character,
and is modified by our institutions; that here it is
surely religious, seeking only religious welfare of
the people, that it does not meddle with the state?
It is not true that Popery meddles not with
politics of the country. The cloven foot has already
shown itself. Popery is organized at the elections!
For example: In Michigan the Bishop Richard, a
Jesuit (since deceased,) was several times chosen
791

Abraham Lincoln, “Spot Resolution”

delegate to Congress from the Territory, the
majority of the people being Catholics. As
Protestants became more numerous, the contest
between the bishop and his Protestant rival was
more and more close, until at length by the
increase of Protestant immigration the latter
triumphed. The bishop, in order to detect any
delinquency in his flock at the polls, had his ticket
printed on colored paper; whether any were so
mutinous as not to vote according to orders, or
what penance was inflicted for disobedience, I did
not learn. The fact of such a truly Jesuitical mode
of espionage I have from a gentleman resident at
that time in Detroit. Is not a fact like this of some
importance? Does it not show that Popery, with
all its speciousness, is the same here as elsewhere;
it manifests, when it has the opportunity, its
genuine disposition to use spiritual power for the
promotion of its temporal ambition. It uses its
ecclesiastical weapons to control an election.
In Charleston, S. C., the Roman Catholic
Bishop England is said to have boasted of the
number of votes that he could control at an
election. I have been informed, on authority
which cannot be doubted that in New York, a
priest, in a late election for city officers, stopped
his congregation after mass on Sunday and urged
the electors not to vote for a particular candidate
on the ground of his being an anti-Catholic; the
result was the election of the Catholic candidate.
It is unnecessary to multiply facts of this nature
nor will it be objected that these instances are
unworthy of notice, because of their local or
circumscribed character. Surely American
Protestants, freemen, have discernment enough to
discover beneath them the cloven foot of this
subtle foreign heresy, and will not wait for a more
extensive, disastrous, and overwhelming political
interference, ere they assume the attitude of
watchfulness and defence. They will see that
Popery is now, what it has ever been, a system of
the darkest political intrigue and despotism,
cloaking itself to avoid attack under the sacred
name of religion. They will be deeply impressed
with the truth, that Popery is a political as well as
a religious system; that in this respect it differs
792

totally from all other sects, from all other forms of
religion in the country!
Source
Morse, Samuel F. B. 1835. Conspiracy against the
Liberties of the United States. New York: Leavitt,
Lord.

Abraham Lincoln, “Spot Resolution” (1847)
The “Spot Resolution” was delivered in the U.S.
Congress by Abraham Lincoln on 22 December
1847. Congressman Lincoln had recently left and
felt it was his duty to go on record with his party, the
Whigs, as being opposed to the War with Mexico.
The Whigs saw the war as an effort by Democrats to
extend slave-holding territory in the United States.
Whereas the President of the United States, in
his message of May 11, 1846, has declared that
“the Mexican Government not only refused to
receive him, [the envoy of the United States,] or
listen to his propositions, but, after a longcontinued series of menaces, has at last invaded
our territory and shed the blood of our fellowcitizens on our own soil:”
And again, in his message of December 8,
1846, that “we had ample cause of war against
Mexico long before the breaking out of hostilities;
but even then we forbore to take redress into our
own hands until Mexico herself became the
aggressor, by invading our soil in hostile array, and
shedding the blood of our citizens:”
And yet again, in his message of December 7,
1847, that “the Mexican Government refused
even to hear the terms of adjustment which he
[our minister of peace] was authorized to propose,
and finally, under wholly unjustifiable pretexts,
involved the two countries in war, by invading the
territory of the State of Texas, striking the first
blow, and shedding the blood of our citizens on
our own soil.”
And whereas this House is desirous to obtain a
full knowledge of all the facts which go to
establish whether the particular spot on which the
blood of our citizens was so shed was or was not
at that time our own soil: Therefore,

“American Platform of Principles: Adopted at Philadelphia, 21 February 1856”

Resolved By the House of Representatives,
That the President of the United States be
respectfully requested to inform this House—
1st. Whether the spot on which the blood of
our citizens was shed, as in his messages declared,
was or was not within the territory of Spain, at
least after the treaty of 1819, until the Mexican
revolution.
2d. Whether that spot is or is not within the
territory which was wrested from Spain by the
revolutionary Government of Mexico.
3d. Whether that spot is or is not within a
settlement of people, which settlement has existed
ever since long before the Texas revolution, and
until its inhabitants fled before the approach of
the United States army.
4th. Whether that settlement is or is not
isolated from any and all other settlements by the
Gulf and the Rio Grande on the south and west,
and by wide uninhabited regions on the north and
east.
5th. Whether the people of that settlement, or
a majority of them, or any of them, have ever
submitted themselves to the government or laws
of Texas or the United States, by consent or
compulsion, either by accepting office, or voting
at elections, or paying tax, or serving on juries, or
having process served upon them, or in any other
way.
6th. Whether the people of that settlement did
or did not flee from the approach of the United
States army, leaving unprotected their homes and
their growing crops, before the blood was shed, as
in the messages stated; and whether the first
blood, so shed, was or was not shed within the
enclosure of one of the people who had thus fled
from it.
7th. Whether our citizens, whose blood was
shed, as in his message declared, were or were
not, at that time, armed officers and soldiers, sent
into that settlement by the military order of the
President, through the Secretary of War.
8th. Whether the military force of the United
States was or was not sent into that settlement
after General Taylor had more than once
intimated to the War Department that, in his

opinion, no such movement was necessary to the
defence or protection of Texas.
Sources
Congressional Globe. 1848. 30th Cong., 1st sess., p.
64.
Basler, Roy P., ed. 1953–1955. The Collected Works
of Abraham Lincoln. 9 vols. New Jersey: Rutgers
University Press, 1: 420–422.

”American Platform of Principles:
Adopted at Philadelphia, 21 February 1856”
The following two extracts emerge from the Know
Nothing Party of the 1850s (also known as the American Party), an organization that turned conspiracyminded nativism into a political movement.
1. An humble acknowledgement to the
Supreme Being, for his protecting care
vouchsafed to our fathers in their successful
Revolutionary struggle, and hitherto manifested to
us, their descendants, in the preservation of the
liberties, the independence and the union of these
States.
2. The perpetuation of the Federal Union and
Constitution, as the palladium of our civil and
religious liberties, and the only sure bulwarks of
American Independence.
3. Americans must rule America, and to this
end native-born citizens should be selected for all
State, Federal, and municipal offices of
government employment, in preference to all
others. Nevertheless,
4. Persons born of American parents residing
temporarily abroad, should be entitled to all the
rights of native-born citizens.
5. No person should be selected for political
station (whether of native or foreign birth), who
recognizes any allegiance or obligation of any
description to any foreign prince, potentate or
power, or who refuses to recognize the Federal
and State Constitution (each within its sphere) as
paramount to all other laws, as rules of political
action.
6. The unequalled recognition and maintenance
of the reserved rights of the several States, and
793

Charles Chiniquy, Fifty Years in the Church of Rome

the cultivation of harmony and fraternal good will
between the citizens of the several States, and to
this end, non-interference by Congress with
questions appertaining solely to the individual
States, and non-intervention by each State with
the affairs of any other State.
7. The recognition of the right of native-born
and naturalized citizens of the United States,
permanently residing in any Territory thereof, to
frame their constitution and laws, and to regulate
their domestic and social affairs in their own
mode, subject only to the provisions of the
Federal Constitution, with the privilege of
admission into the Union whenever they have the
requisite population for one Representative in
Congress: Provided, always, that none but those
who are citizens of the United States, under the
Constitution and laws thereof, and who have a
fixed residence in any such territory, ought to
participate in the formation of the Constitution,
or in the enactment of laws for said Territory or
State.
8. An enforcement of the principles that no
State or Territory ought to admit others than
citizens to the right of suffrage, or of holding
political offices of the United States.
9. A change in the laws of naturalization,
making a continued residence of twenty-one
years, of all not heretofore provided for, an
indispensable requisite for citizenship hereafter,
and excluding all paupers, and persons convicted
of crime, from landing upon our shores; but no
interference with the vested rights of foreigners.
10. Opposition to any union between Church
and State; no interference with religious faith or
worship, and no test oaths for office.
11. Free and thorough investigation into any
and all alleged abuses of public functionaries, and
a strict economy in public expenditures.
12. The maintenance and enforcement of all
laws constitutionally enacted until said laws shall
be repealed, or shall be declared null and void by
competent judicial authority.
13. Opposition to the reckless and unwise
policy of the present Administration in the
general management of our national affairs, and
794

more especially as shown in removing
“Americans” (by designation) and Conservatives
in principle, from office, and placing foreigners
and Ultraists in their places; as shown in a
truckling subserviency to the stronger, and an
insolent and cowardly bravado towards the weaker
powers; as shown in re-opening sectional
agitation; by the repeal of the Missouri
Compromise; as shown in granting to
unnaturalized foreigners the right of suffrage in
Kansas and Nebraska question; as shown in the
corruptions which pervade some of the
Departments of the Government; as shown in
disgracing meritorious naval officers through
prejudice or caprice; and as shown in the
blundering mismanagement of our foreign
relations.
14. Therefore, to remedy existing evils, and
prevent the disastrous consequences otherwise
resulting therefrom, we would build up the
“American Party” upon the principles
hereinbefore stated.
15. That each State Council shall have authority
to amend their several Constitutions, so as to
abolish the several degrees and substitute a
pledge of honor, instead of other obligations, for
fellowship and admission into the party.
16. A free and open discussion of all political
principles embraced in our platform.
Source
Tisdale, ed. 1857. “American Platform of
Principles.” In The True American’s Almanac and
Politician’s Manual for 1857. New York. Available
at http://www.therblig.com/GLCSSRA/archive/
974.htm.

Charles Chiniquy, Fifty Years in the
Church of Rome (1858)
Charles Chiniquy (1809–1899) was a Roman
Catholic priest from 1833 to 1858, first in Quebec,
then in Kankanee, Illinois. He renounced the
Roman Catholic Church in 1858 and went on to
publish widely circulated anti-Catholic tracts. In
the following extract, he details a conversation he
claims to have had with Abraham Lincoln during

Charles Chiniquy, Fifty Years in the Church of Rome

the Civil War. In Chiniquy’s detailed recollection of
the supposed conversation, Lincoln voices concerns
that a papal and Jesuit conspiracy plans to assassinate him, and that the same forces are in fact
orchestrating the Confederate army in the war.
Abraham Lincoln Regarding the Civil War
“If I were fighting against a Protestant South, as a
nation, there would be no danger of assassination.
The nations who read the Bible fight bravely on
the battlefields, but they do not assassinate their
enemies. The pope and the Jesuits, with their
infernal Inquisition, are the only organized
powers in the world which have recourse to the
dagger of the assassin to murder those whom
they cannot convince with their arguments or
conquer with the sword. Unfortunately, I feel
more and more every day, that it is not against
the Americans of the South, alone, I am fighting,
it is more against the pope of Rome, his
perfidious Jesuits and their blind and bloodthirsty slaves.
“As long as they hope to conquer the North,
they will spare me; but the day we rout their
armies, take their cities and force them to submit,
then, it is my impression that the Jesuits, who are
the principal rulers of the South will do what they
have almost invariably done in the past. The
dagger or the pistol will do what the strong hands
of the warriors could not achieve.
“This civil war seems to be nothing but a
political affair to those who do not see, as I do,
the secret springs of that terrible drama. But it is
more a religious than a civil war. It is Rome who
wants to rule and degrade the North, as she has
ruled and degraded the South, from the very day
of its discovery.
“There are only very few of the Southern
leaders who are not more or less under the
influence of the Jesuits, through their wives,
family relations and their friends. Several
members of the family of Jeff Davis belong to the
Church of Rome.
“Even the Protestant ministers are under the
influence of the Jesuits without suspecting it. To
keep her ascendancy in the North; as she does in

the South, Rome is doing here what she has done
in Mexico, and in all the South American
Republics; she is paralyzing, by civil war, the arms
of the soldiers of liberty. She divides our nation in
order to weaken, subdue and rule it.
“But it is very certain that if the American
people could learn what I know of the fierce
hatred of the priests of Rome against our
institutions, our schools, our most sacred rights,
and our dearly bought liberties, they would drive
them away tomorrow from among us, or they
would shoot them as traitors.
“The history of these last thousand years tells us
that wherever the Church of Rome is not a dagger
to pierce the bosom of a free nation, she is a stone
to her neck to paralyze her, and prevent her
advance in the ways of civilization, science,
intelligence, happiness and liberty.
“This war would never have been possible
without the sinister influence of the Jesuits. We
owe it to popery that we now see our land
reddened with the blood of her noblest sons.
[ . . .] I conceal what I know, on that subject, from
the knowledge of the nation; for if the people
knew the whole truth, this war would turn into a
religious war, and it would at once, take a tenfold
more savage and bloody character. It would
become merciless as all religious wars are. It
would become a war of extermination on both
sides.
“The Protestants of both the North and the
South would surely unite to exterminate the
priests and the Jesuits, if they could hear what
Professor Morse has said to me of the plots made
in the very city of Rome to destroy this Republic,
and if they could learn how the priests, the nuns,
and the monks, which daily land on our shores,
under the pretext of preaching their religion,
instructing the people in their schools, taking care
of the sick in the hospitals, are nothing else but
the emissaries of the Pope, of Napoleon, and the
other despots of Europe, to undermine our
institutions, alienate the hearts of our people from
our constitution, and our laws, destroy our
schools, and prepare a reign of anarchy here as
they have done in Ireland, in Mexico, in Spain,
795

John Smith Dye, The Great Conspiracy to Overthrow Liberty in America

and wherever there are any people who want to
be free.”
Source
Chiniquy, Charles. 1886. Fifty Years in the Church
in Rome. London: R. Banks & Son.

John Smith Dye, The Great Conspiracy to
Overthrow Liberty in America (1866)
As much as slave owners of the South in the nineteenth century feared the possibility of slave
revolts, some writers in the North believed that the
slave-holding states constituted a “slave-power”
conspiracy that had long worked covertly to
manipulate the direction of the nation toward its
interests. Although these fears were exaggerated,
President Lincoln was indeed assassinated by a
conspiracy that originated in the South. The following piece was written soon after Lincoln’s
death, and John Smith Dye’s book goes on to allege
that Presidents Harrison and Taylor were also
assassinated by the slave-power conspiracy.
It is the object of the author to give, in a small
compass, a complete history of the political crimes
originating from African Slavery, and perpetuated
by its friend, during the last century, in America.
We think it necessary, for the good of future
generations, to show how these men resorted to
the most atrocious means to defeat the nation’s
will, and control the Government; and all these
failing, how they rose to open rebellion,
determined to destroy the power they could no
longer control. We deem it useless to speak here
of the assassinations of three of our most
illustrious Presidents, all of whom were swept
aside like cobwebs when they stood in the way of
the conspirator’s unholy designs.
Thus all the chief magistrates elected, since the
foundation of the Government, in opposition to
the slave interests, in some form or other, became
victims of assassination.
We have given the history of these foul deeds in
detail; and the evidence furnished will enable the
reader to judge understandingly, and correctly.
[ . . .]
796

The slaves, by the logic of events, should now
become as free as their masters. But as the latter
sought to destroy the Federal Government when
they ceased to control it, so they now seek by
various devices to bring about a condition of
things calculated to produce a war of races. They
want the civilized world to justify them in their
mischievous designs in defying the General
Government behind their old fortification, the
rights of the States, where they are now enacting
unequal laws, determined to retain all the
substance, while they acknowledge that the form
of slavery has become extinct.
Sources
Dye, John Smith. 1866. History of the Plots and
Crimes of the Great Conspiracy to Overthrow
Liberty in America. New York: N.p.
Davis, David Brian, ed. 1971. The Fear of
Conspiracy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

E. J. Farmer, The Conspiracy against
Silver in the United States, 1886
Much political discussion in the United States in
the last quarter of the nineteenth century revolved
around the question of what form America’s money
should take. On one side, hard-money advocates
insisted that gold was the true source of monetary
value. On the other side, during the 1870s a varied
group of antimonopolists argued that only paper
money would be sufficiently flexible to allow ordinary people to have some control over their financial future. Then in the 1880s and 1890s their position became more complicated as some began to
argue that a currency based on both gold and silver
would allow flexibility and prevent the vested interests of the Eastern “money power” from keeping a
stranglehold on the money supply. In championing
the democratic possibilities of silver, many Populist
writers of the time repeated the allegation that
Congress had conspired with the British (and Jewish bankers) in 1873 to demonetize silver—an act
that became known as the “Crime of ’73.”
No nation under the shining sun has a fairer
future than these United States of America,

E. J. Farmer, The Conspiracy against Silver in the United States

whose shores are bathed by two mighty oceans,
whose climate has every varying change, from the
tropics to the poles; whose mountains are teeming
with gold and silver; whose rivers flow through
fertile valleys [ . . .]. Here is a land so fair that to
its hospitable shores are coming in unnumbered
thousands of the oppressed of other lands. Here,
under the ample folds of the American banner of
Liberty, shall flourish the most prosperous nation
that the sun has ever shone upon its circuit of the
globe. Free and independent—before us lie the
grandest opportunities that ever came to any
people in the history of time. We threw off the
shackles of England in the war of the American
Revolution. We have cleared our shores of the
tyranny of Spain. We have by peaceful purchase
absorbed an empire from our old friends and
allies, the French. We have encroached upon
ancient Mexico and conquered a kingdom from
her. We have blotted out the conspiracy of a great
rebellion, and though still in our youth, we are the
richest nation upon the earth.
While these things are so we find old England
envious and still grappling with us for our wealth.
She has grown rich upon the $1,300,000,000 of
gold we sent her since 1849 from our goldmines.
She has grown impudent toward us since we have
opened our treasure vaults of silver, of which she
has none. She has conspired with the Tory
capitalists of our Eastern States to rob us of our
possessions as surely as she conspired with
Benedict Arnold to betray her to our armies in
the days of the Revolution. This England has
never yet given up the idea of victory over the
material resources of America. She tampers with
our Congress, in our finances and our tarrifs. She
reaches forth her golden arm to destroy the value
of our silver, and she finds her dupes and coconspirators amid the bankers of New York and
Boston. Having lost the American market for her
iron, for her coal, and largely for her
manufactured goods, she seeks now, by
destroying the value of our silver product, to filch
from us that metal by enhancing the value of her
gold. [ . . .] While gold is the money of England,

silver is the money of her Indian Empire, and
into India goes the silver that England obtains,
not only from the European nations, but also
fifteen million which she annually secures from
the United States. This silver is necessary to
England—she must have it. She has no silver
mines of her own, and therefore delights to filch
it from surrounding nations. Cut off America’s
supply of silver to England and instantly the price
of silver will advance in the English market. Onehalf of all that goes from England to India comes
from the United States. As long as we are fools
enough to melt our silver into bullion, and sell it
to England at any price she chooses to give us for
it, so long will she depreciate the value of this
precious metal. [ . . .] England knows that she
cannot get ones of these silver dollars for less
than a gold dollar, and therefore she conspired
with a certain class in America to stop the
coinage of the silver, and, if possible, to
demonetize it.
Through treachery silver was demonetized in
the United States by the law of February 12,
1873; but so secretly was this done, that General
Grant, who signed the law, did not know it; nor
did he seem to be aware of its contents as late as
January 14, 1875, for, at the date we find him
recommending one or two new mints to be
established at Chicago, Illinois or Omaha. [ . . .]
The parties who concocted that law understood its
purpose, however, and no doubt received their
reward, whether it was in 30 pieces of gold, or
more. They as completely sold out the nation, as
Judas sold out Christ, and yet we have apologists
for that transaction all over the country to-day.
When the people became aware of how their
interests had been sacrificed to the “golden calf,”
they demanded the re-instatement of silver, and
with great difficulty procured it, in an
emasculated form, in the Bland Bill passed
February 28, 1878. Then it was that the enemies
of silver began to pour out the vials of their wrath,
and to predict the direst evils that ever befell a
nation. These conspirators have kept up their
Cataline assemblages ever since, and, backed by

797

“The Omaha Platform”

England, have their daggers ever ready to strike
down the dollar.
Sources
Farmer, E. J. 1886. The Conspiracy against Silver
in the United States. Cleveland: N.p.
Davis, David Brians, ed. 1971. The Fear of
Conspiracy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

“The Omaha Platform” (1892)
The Omaha Platform of 4 July 1892 set out the
founding principles of the Populist Party. Written
by Ignatius Donnelly, the Omaha Platform presents a picture of a vast conspiracy of the moneyed
elite controlling the impoverished masses.
Assembled upon the 116th anniversary of the
Declaration of Independence, the People’s Party
of America, in their first national convention,
invoking upon their action the blessing of
Almighty God, put forth in the name and on
behalf of the people of this country, the following
preamble and declaration of principles:
The conditions which surround us best justify
our co-operation; we meet in the midst of a nation
brought to the verge of moral, political, and
material ruin. Corruption dominates the ballotbox, the Legislatures, the Congress, and touches
even the ermine of the bench. The people are
demoralized; most of the States have been
compelled to isolate the voters at the polling
places to prevent universal intimidation and
bribery. The newspapers are largely subsidized or
muzzled, public opinion silenced, business
prostrated, homes covered with mortgages, labor
impoverished, and the land concentrating in the
hands of capitalists. The urban workmen are
denied the right to organize for self-protection,
imported pauperized labor beats down their
wages, a hireling standing army, unrecognized by
our laws, is established to shoot them down, and
they are rapidly degenerating into European
conditions. The fruits of the toil of millions are
boldly stolen to build up colossal fortunes for a
few, unprecedented in the history of mankind;
and the possessors of those, in turn, despise the
798

republic and endanger liberty. From the same
prolific womb of governmental injustice we breed
the two great classes—tramps and millionaires.
The national power to create money is
appropriated to enrich bondholders; a vast public
debt payable in legal tender currency has been
funded into gold-bearing bonds, thereby adding
millions to the burdens of the people.
Silver, which has been accepted as coin since
the dawn of history, has been demonetized to add
to the purchasing power of gold by decreasing the
value of all forms of property as well as human
labor, and the supply of currency is purposely
abridged to fatten usurers, bankrupt enterprise,
and enslave industry. A vast conspiracy against
mankind has been organized on two continents,
and it is rapidly taking possession of the world. If
not met and overthrown at once it forebodes
terrible social convulsions, the destruction of
civilization, or the establishment of an absolute
despotism.
We have witnessed for more than a quarter of a
century the struggles of the two great political
parties for power and plunder, while grievous
wrongs have been inflicted upon the suffering
people. We charge that the controlling influences
dominating both these parties have permitted the
existing dreadful conditions to develop without
serious effort to prevent or restrain them. Neither
do they now promise us any substantial reform.
They have agreed together to ignore, in the
coming campaign, every issue but one. They
propose to drown the outcries of a plundered
people with the uproar of a sham battle over the
tariff, so that capitalists, corporations, national
banks, rings, trusts, watered stock, the
demonetization of silver and the oppressions of
the usurers may all be lost sight of. They propose
to sacrifice our homes, lives, and children on the
altar of mammon; to destroy the multitude in
order to secure corruption funds from the
millionaires. [ . . .]
We believe that the power of government—in
other words, of the people—should be expanded
(as in the case of the postal service) as rapidly and
as far as the good sense of an intelligent people

Columbus Record, “Americans Beware”

and the teachings of experience shall justify, to the
end that oppression, injustice, and poverty shall
eventually cease in the land.
While our sympathies as a party of reform are
naturally upon the side of every proposition which
will tend to make men intelligent, virtuous, and
temperate, we nevertheless regard these
questions, important as they are, as secondary to
the great issues now pressing for solution, and
upon which not only our individual prosperity but
the very existence of free institutions depend; and
we ask all men to first help us to determine
whether we are to have a republic to administer
before we differ as to the conditions upon which it
is to be administered, believing that the forces of
reform this day organized will never cease to move
forward until every wrong is remedied and equal
rights and equal privileges securely established for
all the men and women of this country.
PLATFORM
We declare, therefore—
First.—That the union of the labor forces of
the United States this day consummated shall be
permanent and perpetual; may its spirit enter into
all hearts for the salvation of the Republic and the
uplifting of mankind.
Second.—Wealth belongs to him who creates it,
and every dollar taken from industry without an
equivalent is robbery. “If any will not work, neither
shall he eat.” The interests of rural and civic labor
are the same; their enemies are identical.
Third.—We believe that the time has come
when the railroad corporations will either own the
people or the people must own the railroads, and
should the government enter upon the work of
owning and managing all railroads, we should
favor an amendment to the Constitution by which
all persons engaged in the government service
shall be placed under a civil-service regulation of
the most rigid character, so as to prevent the
increase of the power of the national
administration by the use of such additional
government employes.
FINANCE.—We demand a national currency,
safe, sound, and flexible, issued by the general
government only, a full legal tender for all debts,

public and private, and that without the use of
banking corporations, a just, equitable, and
efficient means of distribution direct to the
people, at a tax not to exceed 2 per cent per
annum, to be provided as set forth in the subtreasury plan of the Farmers’ Alliance, or a better
system; also by payments in discharge of its
obligations for public improvements.
[ . . .]
LAND.—The land, including all the natural
sources of wealth, is the heritage of the people,
and should not be monopolized for speculative
purposes, and alien ownership of land should be
prohibited. All land now held by railroads and
other corporations in excess of their actual needs,
and all lands now owned by aliens should be
reclaimed by the government and held for actual
settlers only.
Sources
The World Almanac, 1893. 1893. New York: N.p.,
83–85.
Tindall, George Brown, ed. 1966. A Populist Reader:
Selections from the Works of American Populist
Leaders. New York: Harper & Row, 90–96.

Columbus Record, “Americans
Beware” (1893)
This article presents a forged encyclical supposedly
from Pope Leo XIII calling on Catholics to rescue
the United States from Protestants. The encyclical
was widely reprinted in anti-Catholic organs as
proof that the Vatican was plotting against the
United States. The Columbus Record was a paper
published by the Columbus, Ohio, branch of the
American Protective Association.
Americans Beware
The “Lord God the Pope” says, “Thou Shall
Surely Die.”
Will You Heed the Warning?
The Great Event to Take Place on or about
September 5th, 1893
How Do You Like It?
“Encyclical Letter of His Holiness, Leo XIII,
By Divine Providence, Pope [ . . .]
799

William Harvey, Coin’s Financial School

This pontiff alone hath been constituted head
over all nations and kingdoms, and invested with
power to destroy, to separate, to scatter and
subvert, to plant, build up, link together by
mutual charity, in order to preserve the faithful in
the spirit of unity and surrender them whole and
entire to their saviour. [ . . .]
The American republic, under Protestant
rulers, is with the worst enemies of the church
where security is offered; the republic having
seized upon the lands discovered by Christopher
Columbus, a Catholic, and usurped the
jurisdiction and authority of the supreme head of
the church, the United Sates is filled with obscure
heretics. [ . . .]
The United States has been filled with books
containing the most flagrant heresies, of which
the Protestant version of the Bible is chief. And
not content with adopting its false and impious
doctrines, proselyting [sic] has been resorted to to
turn the Catholics from the one true church. The
whole Roman Catholic hierarchy and priesthood
have been deprived of their livings by the
Protestant heretics of America. [ . . .]
Naturalization oaths have been demanded in
order that the subjects of the true church might
be made to subscribe to the United States
Constitution with its impious laws and nefarious
teachings, to compel them to renounce the true
authority of the Catholic pontiff. [ . . .]
In virtue, thereof, of the divine authority by
which we have been placed on the supreme throne
of justice, an office so superior to our capability, we
do, in all the plenitude of apostolic power, declare
that all heretics and the encouragers of heresy,
together with all adherents, have incurred the
sentence of excommunication. [ . . .]
Moreover, we proclaim the people of the
United States to have forfeited all right to rule
said republic, and also all dominion, dignity, and
privileges appertaining to it. We likewise declare
that all subjects of every rank and condition in the
United States, and every individual who has taken
any oath of loyalty to the United States in any way
whatever, may be absolved from said oath, as also
from all duty, fidelity, or obedience, on or about
800

the 5th of September, 1893, when the Roman
Catholic Congress shall convene at Chicago,
Illinois, as we shall exonerate them from all
engagements: and on or about the feasts of
Ignatius Loyola, in the year of our Lord 1893, it
will be the duty of the faithful to exterminate all
heretics found within the Jurisdiction of the
United States.”
Source
Columbus Record, 20 April 1893, p. 3.

William Harvey, Coin’s
Financial School (1895)
In 1895, William “Coin” Harvey published what
was arguably the most comprehensive critique of
the money and banking system since William
Gouge’s Paper Money and Banking (1833). Harvey
soon became a main source for conspiracy writings
about the financial system, reflecting the concerns
of the Populists, who favored bimetallism.
Hard times are with us; the country is
distracted; very few things are marketable at a
price above the cost of production; tens of
thousands are out of employment; the jails,
penitentiaries, workhouses and insane asylums are
full; the gold reserve at Washington is sinking; the
government is running at a loss with deficit in
every department; huge debt hangs like an
appalling cloud over the country; taxes have
assumed the importance of mortgage, and 50 per
cent of the public revenues are likely to go
delinquent; hungered and half-starved men are
banding into armies and marching toward
Washington; the cry of distress is heard on every
hand; business is paralyzed; commerce is at a
standstill; riots and strikes prevail throughout the
land; schemes to remedy our ills when put into
execution are smashed like box-cars in a railroad
wreck, and Wall Street looks in vain for an excuse
to account for the failure of prosperity to return
since the repeal of the silver purchase act.
The silver dollar still remained the unit and
continued so until 1873. . . . Both [silver and gold]
were legal tender in the payment of all debts, and

William Jennings Bryan, “Cross of Gold Speech”

the mints were open to the coinage of all that
came. So that up to 1873, we were on what was
known as a bimetallic basis, but what was in fact a
silver basis, with gold as a companion metal
enjoying the same privileges as silver, except that
silver fixed the unit, and the value of gold was
regulated by it. This was bimetallism.
Our forefathers showed much wisdom in
selecting silver, of the two metals, out of which to
make the unit. Much depended on this decision.
For the one selected to represent the unit would
therefore be unchangeable in value. That is, the
metal in it could never be worth less than a dollar,
for it would be the unit of value itself. The
demand for silver in the arts or for money by
other nations might make the quantity of silver in
a silver dollar sell more than a dollar but it could
never be worth less than a dollar. Less than itself.
In considering which of these two metals they
would thus favor by making it the unit, they were
led to adopt silver because it was the most
reliable. It was the most favored as money by the
people. It was scattered among all the people.
Men having a design to injure business by making
money scarce, could not so easily get hold of all
the silver and hide it away, as they could gold.
This was the princip[al] reason that led them to
the conclusion to select silver, the more stable of
the two metals, upon which to fix the unit. It was
so much handled by the people and preferred by
them, that it was called the people’s money.
Gold was considered the money of the rich. It
was owned principally by that class of people, and
the poor people seldom handled it, and the very
poor people seldom saw any of it.
Source
Harvey, William H. “Coin.” 1963. Coin’s Financial
School. Edited by Richard H. Hofstadter.
Cambridge: Belknap, 93–99.

William Jennings Bryan,
“Cross of Gold Speech” (1896)
In his famous speech to the Democratic Convention
in 1896, William Jennings Bryan was sympathetic
to the charge that the gold standard—as opposed to

a supposedly more flexible currency standard
pegged to both gold and silver—amounted to a conspiracy against the interests of the ordinary people.
Never before in the history of this country has
there been witnessed such a contest as that
through which we have just passed. Never before
in the history of American politics has a great issue
been fought out as this issue has been, by the
voters of a great party. On the fourth of March,
1895, a few Democrats, most of them members of
congress, issued an address to the Democrats of
the nation, asserting the money question was the
paramount issue of the hour; declaring that a
majority of the Democratic party had the right to
control the action of the party on this paramount
issue; and concluding with the request that the
believers in the free coinage of the Democratic
party should organize, take care of, and control the
policy of the Democratic party. Three months later,
at Memphis, an organization was perfected, and
the silver Democrats went forth openly and
courageously proclaiming their belief, and
declaring that, if successful, they would crystallize
into a platform the declaration which they had
made. Then began the conflict. With a zeal
approaching the zeal which had inspired the
crusaders who followed Peter the Hermit, our
silver Democrats went forth from victory unto
victory until they are now assembled, not to
discuss, not to debate, but to enter up the
judgment already rendered by the plain people of
this country. In this contest brother has been
arrayed against brother, father against son. The
warmest ties of love, acquaintance and association
have been disregarded; old leaders have been cast
aside when they have refused to give expression to
the sentiments of those whom they would lead, and
new leaders have sprung up to give direction to this
cause of truth. Thus has been the contest has been
waged, and we have assembled here under as
binding and solemn instructions as were ever
imposed upon representatives of the people.
They tell us that this platform was made to catch
votes. We reply to them that changing conditions
make new issues; that the principles upon which
801

William Jennings Bryan, “Cross of Gold Speech”

Democracy rests are as everlasting as the hills, but
that they must be applied to new conditions as they
arise. Conditions have arisen, and we are here to
meet those conditions. They tell us that the income
tax ought not to be brought in here; that it is a new
idea. They criticize us for our criticism of the
Supreme Court of the United States. My friends,
we have not criticized; we have simply called
attention to what you already know. If you want
criticisms, read the dissenting opinions of the
court. There you will find criticisms. They say that
we passed an unconstitutional law; we deny it. The
income tax law was not unconstitutional when it
was passed; it was not unconstitutional until one of
the judges changed his mind, and we cannot be
expected to know when a judge will change his
mind. The income tax is just. It simply intends to
put the burdens of government justly upon the
backs of the people. I am in favor of an income tax.
When I find a man who is not willing to bear his
share of the burdens of the government which
protects him, I find a man who is unworthy to
enjoy the blessings of a government like ours.
Mr. McKinley was nominated at St. Louis upon
a platform which declared for the maintenance of
the gold standard until it can be changed into
bimetallism by international agreement. Mr.
McKinley was the most popular man among the
Republicans, and three months ago everybody in
the Republican Party prophesized his election.
How is today? Why, the man who was once
pleased to think that he looked like Napoleon—
that man shudders today when he remembers that
he was nominated on the anniversary of the battle
of Waterloo. Not only that, but as he listens he
can hear with ever-increasing distinctness the
sound of the waves as they beat upon the lonely
shores of St. Helena.
Why this change? Ah, my friends, is not the
reason for the change evident to any one who will
look at the matter? No private character, however
pure, no personal popularity, however great, can
protect from the avenging wrath of an indignant
people a man who will declare that he is in favor
of fastening the gold standard upon this country,
or who is willing to surrender the right of self802

government and place the legislative control of
our affairs in the hands of foreign potentates and
powers.
You come to us and tell us that the great cities
are in favor of the gold standard; we reply that the
great cities rest upon our broad and fertile
prairies. Burn down your cities and leave our
farms, and your cities will spring up again as if by
magic; but destroy our farms and the grass will
grow in the streets of every city in the country.
My friends, we declare that this nation is able to
legislate for its own people on every question,
without waiting for the aid or consent of any other
nation on earth; and upon that issue we expect to
carry every State in the Union. I shall not slander
the inhabitants of the State of New York by saying
that, when they are confronted with the
proposition, they will declare that this nation is not
able to attend its own business. It is the issue of
1776 over again. Our ancestors, when but three
millions in number, had the courage to declare
their political independence of every other nation;
shall we, their descendants, when we have grown
to seventy millions, declare that we are less
independent than our forefathers? No, my friends,
that will never be the verdict of our people.
Therefore, we care not upon what lines the battle
is fought. If they say bimetallism is good, but we
cannot have it until other nations help us, we reply
that, instead of having a gold standard because
England has, we will restore bimetallism, and then
let England have bimetallism because the United
States has it. If they dare to come out in the open
field and defend the gold standard as a good thing,
we will fight them to the uttermost. Having
behind us the producing masses of this nation and
the world, supported by the commercial interests,
and the toilers everywhere, we will answer their
demand for a gold standard by saying to them: You
shall not press down upon the brow of labor this
crown of thorns, you shall not crucify mankind
upon a cross of gold.
Source
Bryan, William Jennings. 1896. The First Battle: A
Story of the Campaign of 1896. Chicago: W. B.
Conkey, 199–206.

Theodore Roosevelt, “The Hun within Our Gates”

Protocols of the Elders of Zion (c. 1900)
The Protocols of the Elders of Zion purport to document a meeting of a secret Jewish cabal bent on ruling the world. They were incontrovertibly proven to
be a forgery in 1920, but that did not stop the text
from becoming the cornerstone of twentieth-century
antisemitic ideology. Henry Ford popularized them
in The International Jew, and the Nazis employed
them to chilling effect in their racist ideology. Today
the Protocols are still distributed by antisemitic
groups throughout the world. In “Protocol 6,” the
Elders describe some of their takeover technique.
The fact that they attack the aristocracy in particular seems to reveal a pro-aristocratic prejudice on
the part of the Protocols’ creator.
Take-Over Technique
Reservoirs of riches—Destruction of goy
aristocracy—Vicious circle of rising prices
1. We shall soon begin to establish huge
monopolies, reservoirs of colossal riches, upon
which even, large fortunes of the goyim will
depend to such an extent that they will go to the
bottom together with the credit of the States on
the day after the political smash [ . . .] .
2. You gentlemen here present who are
economists, just strike an estimate of the
significance of this combination! [ . . .]
3. In every possible way we must develop the
significance of our Super-Government by
representing it as the Protector and Benefactor of
all those who voluntarily submit to us.
4. The aristocracy of the goyim as a political
force, is dead—We need not take it into account;
but as landed proprietors they can still be harmful
to us from the fact that they are self-sufficing in
the resources upon which they live. It is essential
therefore for us at whatever cost to deprive them
of their land. This object will be best attained by
increasing the burdens upon landed property—in
loading lands with debts. These measures will
check land-holding and keep it in a state of
humble and unconditional submission.
5. The aristocrats of the goyim, being
hereditarily incapable of contenting themselves
with little, will rapidly burn up and fizzle out.

6. At the same time we must intensively
patronise trade and industry, but, first and
foremost, speculation, the part played by which is
to provide a counterpoise to industry: the absence
of speculative industry will multiply capital in
private hands and will serve to restore agriculture
by freeing the land from indebtedness to the land
banks. What we want is that industry should drain
off from the land both labour and capital and by
means of speculation transfer into our hands all
the money of the world, and thereby throw all the
goyim into the ranks of the proletariat. Then the
goyim will bow down before us, if for no other
reason but to get the right to exist.
7. To complete the ruin of the industry of the
goyim we shall bring to the assistance of
speculation the luxury which we have developed
among the goyim, that greedy demand for luxury
which is swallowing up everything. We shall raise
the rate of wages which, however, will not bring
any advantage to the workers, for, at the same
time, we shall produce a rise in prices of the first
necessaries of life, alleging that it arises from the
decline of agriculture and cattle-breeding: we
shall further undermine artfully and deeply
sources of production, by accustoming the
workers to anarchy and to drunkenness and side
by side therewith taking all measures to extirpate
from the face of the earth all the educated forces
of the goyim.
8. In order that the true meaning of things may
not strike the goyim before the proper time we
shall mask it under an alleged ardent desire to
serve the working classes and the great principles
of political economy about which our economic
theories are carrying on an energetic propaganda.
Source
The Protocols of the Meetings of the Learned Elders
of Zion. 1931. Translated by Victor E. Marsden.
London: Britons Publishing Society.

Theodore Roosevelt, “The Hun
within Our Gates” (1917)
In this appendix to Theodore Roosevelt’s 1917 book
The Foes of Our Own Household, Roosevelt issues
803

Zimmermann Telegram

a warning against “disloyal” German Americans as
the United States enters World War I. His nativist
attack also latches onto subversive socialists and
those “following out the vicious teachings of the
Prussian philosophers.”
The Hun within our gates is the worst of the
foes of our own household, whether he is the paid
or the unpaid agent of Germany. Whether he is
pro-German or poses as a pacifist, or a peace-atany-price man, matters little. He is the enemy of
the United States. Senators and Congressmen like
Messrs. Stone, La Follette and Maclemore belong
in Germany and it is a pity they cannot be sent
there, as Vallandigham was sent to the hostile lines
by Lincoln during the Civil War. Such men are
among the worst of the foes of our own household;
and so are the sham philanthropists and sinister
agitators and the wealthy creatures without
patriotism who support and abet them. Our
Government has seemed afraid to grapple with
these people. It is permitting thousands of allies of
Berlin to sow the seeds of treason and sedition in
this country. The I. W. W. boasts its defiance of all
law, and many of its members exultingly proclaim
that in their war against industry in the United
States they are endeavoring to give the
Government so much to do that it will have no
troops to spare for Europe. Every district where
the I. W. W. starts rioting should be placed under
martial law, and cleaned up by military methods.
The German-language papers carry on a consistent
campaign in favor of Germany against England.
They should be put out of existence for the period
of this war. The Hearst papers, more ably edited
than the German sheets, play the Kaiser’s game in
a similar way. When they keep within the law they
should at least be made to feel the scorn felt for
them by every honest American. Wherever any
editor can be shown to be purveying any treason
in violation of law he should be jailed until the
conflict is over. Every disloyal German-born
citizen should have his naturalization papers
recalled and should be interned during the term of
the war. Action of this kind is especially necessary
in order to pick out the disloyal but vociferous
804

minority of citizens of German descent from the
vast but silent majority of entirely loyal citizens of
German descent who otherwise will suffer from a
public anger that will condemn all alike. Every
disloyal native-born American should be
disenfranchised and interned. It is time to strike
our enemies at home heavily and quickly. Every
copperhead in this country in an enemy to the
Government, to the people, to the army and to the
flag, and should be treated as such.
This pro-German, anti-American propaganda
has been carried on for years prior to the war, and
its treasonable activities are performed
systematically to-day. The great majority of men
and women of German blood, are absolutely good
Americans, and we owe it just as much to them as
to the rest of our fellow countrymen with the
utmost severity to suppress the tens of thousands
of Germans and German-Americans who, having
taken the oath of allegiance, yet intrigue and
conspire against the United States and do their
utmost to promote the success of Germany and to
weaken the defense of this nation. These men
support and direct pro-German societies. They
incite disloyal activities among the Russian Jews.
They finance the small groups of Irish-Americans
whose hatred for England makes them traitors to
the United States. They foment seditious
operations among the German-American socialists
and I.W.W’s; they support the German-language
periodicals. Their campaigns range from peace
movements and anti-draft schemings to open
efforts in favor of sedition and civil war. [ . . .]
Source
Roosevelt, Theodore. 1917. The Foes of Our Own
Household. New York: George Doran.

Zimmermann Telegram (1917)
This telegram, from the German foreign minister
Arthur Zimmermann to the German ambassador in
Mexico, was intercepted by the British and was one
of the decisive elements that prompted the United
States to enter World War I. A popular suspicion,
however, is that it was deliberately forged to provoke just such a reaction.

“An Introduction to the ‘Jewish Protocols’”

We intend to begin on the first of February
unrestricted submarine warfare. We shall
endeavor in spite of this to keep the United States
of America neutral. In the event of this not
succeeding, we make Mexico a proposal or
alliance on the following basis: make war together,
make peace together, generous financial support
and an understanding on our part that Mexico is
to reconquer the lost territory in Texas, New
Mexico, and Arizona. The settlement in detail is
left to you. You will inform the President of the
above most secretly as soon as the outbreak of war
with the United States of America is certain and
add the suggestion that he should, on his own
initiative, invite Japan to immediate adherence
and at the same time mediate between Japan and
ourselves. Please call the President’s attention to
the fact that the ruthless employment of our
submarines now offers the prospect of compelling
England in a few months to make peace.
Source
National Archives and Records Administration
website: http://www.nara.gov/education/teaching/
zimmermann/zimmerma.html.

“An Introduction to the
‘Jewish Protocols’” (1920)
Henry Ford’s journal, The Dearborn Independent,
published ninety-one antisemitic articles that were
subsequently reprinted in four volumes as The
International Jew: The World’s Foremost Problem.
With chapter titles such as “The Scope of Jewish
Dictatorship in the U.S.” and “Does Jewish Power
Control the World Press?” The International Jew
popularized the idea of an international Jewish
conspiracy. In the following excerpt, entitled “An
Introduction to the ‘Jewish Protocols,’” the Protocols of the Elders of Zion are introduced to an
American audience for the first time.
The criticisms which these Protocols pass upon
the Gentiles for their stupidity are just. It is
impossible to disagree with a single item in the
Protocols’ description of Gentile mentality and
veniality. Even the most astute of the Gentile

thinkers have been fooled into receiving as the
motions of progress what has only been insinuated
into the common human mind by the most
insidious systems of propaganda.
It is true that here and there a thinker has
arisen to say that science so-called was not science
at all. It is true that here and there a thinker has
arisen to say that the so-called economic laws
both of conservative and radicals were not laws at
all, but artificial inventions. It is true that
occasionally a keen observer has asserted that the
recent debauch of luxury and extravagance was
not due to the natural impulses of the people at
all, but was systematically stimulated, foisted upon
them by design. It is true that a few have
discerned that more than half of what passes for
“public opinion” is mere hired applause and
booing and had never impressed the public mind.
But even with these clues here and there, for
the most part disregarded, there has never been
enough continuity and collaboration between
those who were awake, to follow all the clues to
their source. The chief explanation of the hold
which the Protocols have had on many of the
leading statesmen of the world for several decades
is that they explain whence all these false
influences come and what their purpose is. They
give a clue to the modern maze. It is now time for
the people to know. And whether the Protocols
are judged as proving anything concerning the
Jews or not, they constitute an education in the
way the masses are turned about like sheep by
influences which they do not understand. It is
almost certain that once the principles of the
Protocols are known widely and understood by
the people, the criticism which they now rightly
make of the Gentile mind will no longer hold
good.
It is the purpose of future articles in this series
to study these documents and to answer out of
their contents all the questions that may arise
concerning them.
Before that work is begun, one question should
be answered—“Is there likelihood of the program
of the Protocols being carried through to
success?” The program is successful already. In
805

A. Mitchell Palmer, “The Case against the Reds”

many of its most important phases it is already a
reality. But this need not cause alarm, for the
chief weapon to be used against such a program,
both in its completed and uncompleted parts, is
clear publicity. Let the people know. Arousing the
people, alarming the people, appealing to the
passions of the people is the method of the plan
outlined in the Protocols. The antidote is merely
enlightening the people.
That is the only purpose of these articles.
Enlightenment dispels prejudice. It is as desirable
to dispel the prejudice of the Jew as of the
Gentile. Jewish writers too frequently assume that
the prejudice is all on one side. The Protocols
themselves ought to have the widest circulation
among the Jewish people, in order that they may
check those things which are bringing suspicion
upon their name.
Source
Ford, Henry. 1920. The International Jew. 4 vols.
Dearborn, MI: Dearborn Publishing, 1: 109–116.

A. Mitchell Palmer, “The Case
against the Reds” (1920)
In this excerpt Attorney General A. Mitchell
Palmer argues that America needs to be extremely
watchful of the spread of communism in its cities.
Our Government in Jeopardy
It has always been plain to me that when
American citizens unite upon any national issue,
they are generally right, but it is sometimes
difficult to make the issue clear to them. If the
Department of Justice could succeed in attracting
the attention of our optimistic citizens to the issue
of internal revolution in this country, we felt sure
there would be no revolution. The Government
was in jeopardy. My private information of what
was being done by the organization known as the
Communist Party of America, with headquarters
in Chicago, of what was being done by the
Communist Internationale under their manifesto
planned at Moscow last March by Trotzky, Lenin
and others, addressed “To Proletariats of All
Countries,” of what strides the Communist Labor
806

Party was making, removed all doubt. In this
conclusion we did not ignore the definite
standards of personal liberty, of free speech,
which is the very temperament and heart of the
people. The evidence was examined with the
utmost care, with a personal leaning toward
freedom of thought and word on all questions.
The whole mass of evidence, accumulated from
all parts of the country, was scrupulously scanned,
not merely for the written or spoken differences
of viewpoint as to the Government of the United
States, but, in spite of these things, to see if the
hostile declarations might not be sincere in their
announced motive to improve our social order.
There was no hope of such a thing.
By stealing, murder and lies, Bolshevism has
looted Russia not only of its material strength, but
its moral force. A small clique of outcasts from
the East Side of New York has attempted this,
with what success we all know. Because a
disreputable alien—Leon Bronstein, the man who
now calls himself Trozky—can inaugurate a reign
of terror from his throne room in the Kremlin;
because the lowest of all types known to New
York can sleep in the Czar’s bed, while hundreds
of thousands in Russia are without food or shelter,
should Americans be swayed by such doctrines?
Such a question, it would seem, should receive
but one answer from America.
Source
Palmer, A. Mitchell. 1920. “The Case against the
Reds.” Forum 63: 174–175.

Bishop Alma White, Heroes of
the Fiery Cross (1928)
In this excerpt from his Ku Klux Klan book Heroes
of the Fiery Cross, Bishop Alma White sounds the
alarm about imagined threats to Protestant Americans from Catholics and Jews. In particular he
warns about the dangers for young women
employed in the film industry that, in his eyes, is
licentious and Jewish controlled.
The sons of Jacob have been wanderers upon
the face of the earth, driven by the winds of

Bishop Alma White, Heroes of the Fiery Cross

adversity and hounded from pillar to post for the
past two thousand years. Now, having found a
refuge in the United States where the
government has been builded upon the principles
of the Christian religion, they take advantage of
the favours that have been shown them and make
conditions intolerable for Protestant Americans.
With Rome, they would tear the Constitution into
bits and throw it into the scrap-heap, take the
New Testament out of every public school, and
place the reins of government in the hands of the
Roman hierarchy. This is what a Christian nation
gets in return for good will and charity shown
God’s ancient people.
While in other countries with their old
autocratic systems the Hebrews have suffered
from intolerance, here in this great republic,
where they have enjoyed liberty as in no other
country on the globe, they have shown themselves
to be cruel, intolerant, and unworthy of the
kindness that has been shown to them. Have good
will and forbearance ceased to be virtues? and is it
not time for other measures to be taken to protect
our homes, our institutions, and our country from
the rapine and outlawry that has been practised
before our eyes?
Our wealth and material resources are being
controlled largely by the Jews, who have
monopolized most of the large industries of the
country, employing an army of Protestant
American girls for their sweat-shops often for a
mere pittance. These employees are in some
places as truly the bond-slaves of their masters as
if they were held in legalised slavery. You will find
them on every occasion doing the will of their
commercial bosses whose foreign accent betrays
their race and birth. The public has never
dreamed to what colossal proportions such
servitude has attained in our large cities and
business centers. Young women, often of our best
American stock, have to eat, dress, and keep
hours to suit their masters. Without proper and
suitable clothing, their bodies are exposed to the
extremes of heat and cold. Furs are worn in
summer and gauze in winter, as it may suit the
purpose of the commercial men who control the

fashions, in the disposal of their goods. Comfort is
no longer taken into consideration, if any kind of
fad or fashion will bring the “bosses” material
gain.
It was not so twenty-five years ago, before the
great influx of immigrants to our shores from
lower Europe. There was a public conscience
then, even in the matter of women’s apparel; but
now women’s fashions are capitalized by the
unscrupulous Hebrew.
As to moral standards, the modern Jew has no
code to restrain him in his dealings with Gentile
women. He was brought up under the Mosaic law
and knows but little and perhaps cares less about
the principles that govern society in a great
republic where the government was founded on
the principles of the Christian religion. These
women, when in his employ and often under
obligations to him, must, as a rule, be on the
defensive in order to keep their virtue. Few are
able to hold out against temptation and the
pressure that is brought to bear upon them by
men in whose characters animal passion and
greed are the predominant forces.
Great numbers of young women are employed
in foreign-controlled theaters and the motion
picture industries, who are as completely under
the domination of the Hebrew producers and
white slavers as if owned by them body and soul.
Many times in my travels on railroads and
steamships I have met theatrical companies and
heard young women discuss their work on the
stage and also their “bosses.” They were
frequently heard to say, “My boss doesn’t allow
me to do this or that.” One young woman was
heard telling another what her “boss” required
her to wear when she danced the “shimmy.” I am
not sufficiently familiar with the language of the
vaudeville to know what she meant, but I
understood enough to know that she was a slave
of her Hebrew master, and in a position where it
was impossible for her to break the chains,
however much she might have desired to do so.
Source
White, Bishop Alma. 1928. Heroes of the Fiery
Cross. Zarephath, NJ: The Good Citizen.

807

Louis T. McFadden, The Federal Reserve: A Corrupt System

Louis T. McFadden, The Federal Reserve:
A Corrupt System (1934)
In 1934 Congressman Louis T. McFadden (R-Pennsylvania) made a lengthy address to the House,
accusing the Federal Reserve Bank of conspiracy,
fraud, and treason. There is a long-running strand
of conspiracy-minded fear about the power of central banking in the United States (see, for example,
the excerpt from Congressman Traficant later in
this section).
Mr. Chairman, we have in this Country one of
the most corrupt institutions the world has ever
known. I refer to the Federal Reserve Board and
the Federal Reserve Banks, hereinafter called the
Fed. The Fed has cheated the Government of
these United States and the people of the United
States out of enough money to pay the Nation’s
debt. The depredations and iniquities of the Fed
has cost enough money to pay the National debt
several times over.
This evil institution has impoverished and
ruined the people of these United States, has
bankrupted itself, and has practically bankrupted
our Government. It has done this through the
defects of the law under which it operates,
through the maladministration of that law by the
Fed and through the corrupt practices of the
moneyed vultures who control it.
Some people think that the Federal Reserve
Banks are United States Government institutions.
They are private monopolies which prey upon
the people of these United States for the benefit
of themselves and their foreign customers;
foreign and domestic speculators and swindlers;
and rich and predatory money lenders. In that
dark crew of financial pirates there are those
who would cut a man’s throat to get a dollar
out of his pocket; there are those who send
money into states to buy votes to control our
legislatures; there are those who maintain
international propaganda for the purpose of
deceiving us into granting of new concessions
which will permit them to cover up their past
misdeeds and set again in motion their gigantic
train of crime.
808

These twelve private credit monopolies were
deceitfully and disloyally foisted upon this
Country by the bankers who came here from
Europe and repaid us our hospitality by
undermining our American institutions. Those
bankers took money out of this Country to finance
Japan in a war against Russia. They created a
reign of terror in Russia with our money in order
to help that war along. They instigated the
separate peace between Germany and Russia, and
thus drove a wedge between the allies in the
World War. They financed Trotsky’s passage from
New York to Russia so that he might assist in the
destruction of the Russian Empire. They
fomented and instigated the Russian Revolution,
and placed a large fund of American dollars at
Trotsky’s disposal in one of their branch banks in
Sweden so that through him Russian homes might
be thoroughly broken up and Russian children
flung far and wide from their natural protectors.
They have since begun breaking up of American
homes and the dispersal of American children.
Mr. Chairman, there should be no partisanship in
matters concerning banking and currency affairs
in this Country, and I do not speak with any. [ . . .]
The danger that the Country was warned
against came upon us and is shown in the long
train of horrors attendant upon the affairs of the
traitorous and dishonest Fed. Look around you
when you leave this Chamber and you will see
evidences of it in all sides. This is an era of misery
and for the conditions that caused that misery, the
Fed are fully liable. This is an era of financed
crime and in the financing of crime the Fed does
not play the part of a disinterested spectator. [ . . .]
Meanwhile and on account of it, we ourselves
are in the midst of the greatest depression we have
ever known. From the Atlantic to the Pacific, our
Country has been ravaged and laid waste by the
evil practices of the Fed and the interests which
control them. At no time in our history, has the
general welfare of the people been at a lower level
or the minds of the people so full of despair.
Recently in one of our States, 60,000 dwelling
houses and farms were brought under the hammer
in a single day. 71,000 houses and farms in Oakland

J. Edgar Hoover, “Testimony before HUAC”

County, Michigan, were sold and their erstwhile
owners dispossessed. The people who have thus
been driven out are the wastage of the Fed. They
are the victims of the Fed. Their children are the
new slaves of the auction blocks in the revival of
the institution of human slavery. [ . . .]
Mr. Chairman, there is nothing like the Fed
pool of confiscated bank deposits in the world. It
is a public trough of American wealth in which
the foreigners claim rights, equal to or greater
than Americans. The Fed are the agents of the
foreign central banks. They use our bank
depositors’ money for the benefit of their foreign
principals. They barter the public credit of the
United States Government and hire it out to
foreigners at a profit to themselves.
All this is done at the expense of the United
States Government, and at a sickening loss to the
American people. Only our great wealth enabled
us to stand the drain of it as long as we did.
We need to destroy the Fed wherein our
national reserves are impounded for the benefit of
the foreigners. We need to save America for
Americans. [ . . .]
Source
Available at http://www.conspiracyarchive.com/
Archive/Federal_Reserve_McFadden.html.

J. Edgar Hoover, “Testimony
before HUAC” (1947)
The testimony given by FBI Director J. Edgar
Hoover before the House Un-American Activities
Committee in 1947 sounded the keynote of the
McCarthy era, as well as represented a pivotal
moment in the criminalization of the Communist
Party of the United States of America (CPUSA) and
its followers, or “fellow travelers” (a term first coined
by Bolshevik leader Leon Trotsky). Although Hoover
was not generally noted for public appearances, his
testimony was widely publicized in the American
media, and his alarmist rhetoric—much of it drawn
from a highly selective reading of Marxist-Leninist
literature—would become part of the lexicon of the
time, recycled in innumerable judicial hearings,
news articles, and political speeches.

The Communist movement in the United
States began to manifest itself in 1919. Since
then, it has changed its name and party line
whenever expedient and tactical. But always it
comes back to the fundamentals and bills itself as
the party of Marxism-Leninism. As such, it stands
for the destruction of American democracy; it
stands for the destruction of free enterprise; and
it stands for the creation of a “Soviet of the
United States” and ultimate world revolution.
[ . . .]
What is important is the claim of the
Communists themselves that for every party
member there are 10 others ready, willing, and
able to do the party’s work. Herein lies the
greatest menace of communism. For these are the
people who infiltrate and corrupt various spheres
of American life. So rather than the size of the
Communist Party, the way to weigh its true
importance is by testing its influence, its ability to
infiltrate.
The size of the party is relatively unimportant
because of the enthusiasm and iron-clad discipline
under which they operate. In this connection, it
might be of interest that in 1917 when the
Communists overthrew the Russian Government
there was one Communist for every 2,277 persons
in Russia. In the United States today there is one
Communist for every 1,814 persons in the
country.
One who accepts the aims, principles, and
program of the party, who attends meetings, who
reads the party press and literature, who pays
dues, and who is active on behalf of the party
“shall be considered a member.” The open,
avowed Communist who carries a card and pays
dues is no different from a security standpoint
than the person who does the party’s work but
pays no dues, carries no card, and is not on the
party rolls. In fact, the latter is a greater menace
because of his opportunity to work in stealth.
[When] identifying undercover Communists,
“fellow travelers,” and sympathizers, the burden
of proof is placed upon those who consistently
follow the ever-changing, twisting party line.
Fellow travelers and sympathizers can deny
809

“NSC-68: The United States Objectives and Programs for National Security”

membership but they can never escape the
undeniable fact that they have played into the
Communist hands thus furthering the Communist
cause by playing the role of innocent, gullible, or
willful allies. [ . . .]
The deceptiveness of the Communist “double
talk” fulfills the useful propaganda technique of
confusion. In fact, Lenin referred to their peculiar
brand of phraseology as “ [ . . .] that cursed
Aesopian language [ . . .] which compelled all
revolutionaries to have recourse, whenever they
took up their pens to write a legal work.”
Lenin used it for the purpose of avoiding
“censorship.” Communists today use it to mislead
the public. [ . . .]
The Communist Party of the United States is a
“fifth column” if there ever was one. [ . . .]
They are seeking to weaken America just as
they did in their era of obstruction when they
were aligned with the Nazis. Their goal is the
overthrow of our Government.
There is no doubt where a real Communist’s
loyalty rests. Their allegiance is to Russia, not the
United States. [ . . .]
The Communists have been, still are, and
always will be a menace to freedom, to
democratic ideals, to the worship of God, and to
America’s way of life.
I feel that once public opinion is thoroughly
aroused as it is today, the fight against
communism is well on its way. Victory will be
assured once Communists are identified and
exposed, because the public will take the first step
of quarantining them so they can do no harm.
Communism, in reality, is not a political party. It
is a way of life—an evil and malignant way of life.
It reveals a condition akin to disease that spreads
like an epidemic and like an epidemic a
quarantine is necessary to keep it from infecting
the Nation.
Sources
Hoover, J. Edgar. 1947. Testimony. 26 March.
House Committee on Un-American Activities.
Hearings on H.R. 1884 and H.R. 2122. 80th
Cong., 1st sess.

810

Schrecker, Ellen. 1994. The Age of McCarthyism: A
Brief History with Documents. New York:
Bedford.

“NSC-68: The United States Objectives and
Programs for National Security” (1950)
Drafted by a joint committee of the State and
Defense Departments, NSC-68 represented a concise statement of position from those in the Washington foreign policy establishment who advocated a
more proactive anti-Communist policy at home and
abroad during the formative years of the Cold War.
Coming soon after the president’s Truman Doctrine,
which effectively legitimized the development of
such a policy, the powerful “hawkish” mandarins in
the two key government departments offered NSC68 as both an ethical justification for the cold war
and as an effective blueprint for its prosecution. The
justification proceeded from the alarmist conclusions
of earlier documents like Kennan’s “Long Telegram”
and painted the picture of a world irreconcilably
divided along ideological lines. The inscrutable and
sinister “design” of the Kremlin was set in stark
opposition to the clarity and transparency of American “purpose” as defined in the Constitution.
The Fundamental Purpose of the United States
The fundamental purpose of the United States
is laid down in the Preamble to the Constitution:
“[ . . .] to form a more perfect Union, establish
justice, insure domestic Tranquillity, provide for
the common defence, promote the general
Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to
ourselves and our Posterity.” In essence the
fundamental purpose is to assure the integrity and
vitality of our free society, which is founded upon
the dignity and worth of the individual.
Three realities emerge as a consequence of this
purpose: Our determination to maintain the
essential elements of individual freedom, as set
forth in the Constitution and Bill of Rights; our
determination to create conditions under which
our free and democratic system can live and
prosper; and our determination to fight if

“NSC-68: The United States Objectives and Programs for National Security”

necessary to defend our way of life, for which as
in the Declaration of Independence, “with a firm
reliance on the protection of Divine Providence,
we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our
Fortunes, and our sacred Honor.”
The Fundamental Design of the Kremlin
The fundamental design of those who control
the Soviet Union and the international communist
movement is to retain and solidify their absolute
power, first in the Soviet Union and second in the
areas now under their control. In the minds of the
Soviet leaders, however, achievement of this
design requires the dynamic extension of their
authority and the ultimate elimination of any
effective opposition to their authority.
The design, therefore, calls for the complete
subversion or forcible destruction of the
machinery of government and structure of society
in the countries of the non-Soviet world and their
replacement by an apparatus and structure
subservient to and controlled from the Kremlin.
To that end Soviet efforts are now directed toward
the domination of the Eurasian land mass. The
United States, as the princip[al] center of power in
the non-Soviet world and the bulwark of
opposition to Soviet expansion, is the princip[al]
enemy whose integrity and vitality must be
subverted or destroyed by one means or another if
the Kremlin is to achieve its fundamental design.
[ . . .]
Thus unwillingly our free society finds itself
mortally challenged by the Soviet system. No
other value system is so wholly irreconcilable with
ours, so implacable in its purpose to destroy ours,
so capable of turning to its own uses the most
dangerous and divisive trends in our own society,
no other so skilfully and powerfully evokes the
elements of irrationality in human nature
everywhere, and no other has the support of a
great and growing military power.
[ . . .]
In a shrinking world, which now faces the
threat of atomic warfare, it is not an adequate
objective to seek to check the Kremlin design, for
the absence of order among nations is becoming

less and less tolerable. This fact imposes on us, in
our own interests, the responsibility of world
leadership.
All [the] objectives of a free society are equally
valid and necessary in peace and war. But every
consideration of devotion to our fundamental
values and to national security demands that we
seek to achieve them by the strategy of the cold
war [ . . .].
[ . . .]
The free society is limited in its choice of
means to achieve its ends.
Compulsion is the negation of freedom, except
when it is used to enforce the rights common to
all. The resort to force, internally or externally, is
therefore the last resort for a free society [ . . .].
The free society cherishes and protects as
fundamental the rights of the minority against the
will of a majority, because these rights are the
inalienable rights of each and every individual.
The resort to force, to compulsions, to the
imposition of its will is therefore a difficult and
dangerous act for a free society, which is warranted
only in the face of even greater dangers [ . . .].
The Kremlin is able to select whatever means
are expedient in seeking to carry out its
fundamental design. Thus it can make the best of
several possible worlds, conducting the struggle
on those levels where it consider it profitable and
enjoying the benefits of a pseudo-peace on those
levels where it is not ready for a contest. At the
ideological or psychological level, in the struggle
for men’s minds, the conflict is worldwide. At the
political and economic level, within states and in
the relations between states, the struggle for
power is being intensified. And at the military
level, the Kremlin has thus far been careful not to
commit a technical breach of the peace, although
using its vast forces to intimidate its neighbors,
and to support an aggressive foreign policy, and
not hesitating through its agents to resort to arms
in favorable circumstances. The attempt to carry
out its fundamental design is being pressed,
therefore, with all means which are believed
expedient in the present situation, and the

811

Senator Joseph McCarthy, “Conspiracy of Infamy” Speech

Kremlin has inexorably engaged us in the conflict
between its design and our purpose.
[ . . .]
With particular reference to the United States,
the Kremlin’s strategic and tactical policy is
affected by its estimate that we are not only the
greatest immediate obstacle which stands
between it and world domination, we are also the
only which could release forces in the free and
Soviet worlds which could destroy it. The
Kremlin’s policy towards us is consequently
animated by a peculiarly violent blend of hatred
and fear. Its strategy has been one of attempting
to undermine the complex of forces in this
country and in the rest of the free world, on
which our power is based. In this it has but
adhered to doctrine and followed the sound
principle of seeking maximum results with
minimum risk and commitments. The present
application of this strategy is a new form of
expression for traditional Russian caution.
However, there is no justification in Soviet theory
or practice for believing that, should the Kremlin
become convinced that it could cause our
downfall by one conclusive blow, it would not
seek that solution.
Source
U.S. Department of State. “NSC-68: United States
Objectives and Programs for National Security
(14 April 1950). A Report to the President
Pursuant to the President’s Directive of 31
January 1950.” In Foreign Relations of the United
States: 1950. Vol. 1. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of State.

Senator Joseph McCarthy, “Conspiracy of
Infamy” Speech (14 June 1951)
In this famous address to Congress, Senator
McCarthy made his accusation of a vast Communistsympathizing “conspiracy of infamy” reaching to the
highest levels and General George C. Marshall in
particular.
We believe that men high in this Government
are concerting to deliver us to disaster. [ . . .]

812

This must be the product of a great conspiracy, a
conspiracy on a scale so immense as to dwarf any
previous such venture in the history of man. A
conspiracy of infamy so black that, when it is
finally exposed, its principals shall be forever
deserving of the maledictions of all honest men
[ . . .]. We are convinced that Dean Acheson,
who steadfastly serves the interests of nations
other than his own, the friend of Alger Hiss,
[ . . .] must be high on the roster. The
President? He is their captive. [ . . .] Truman is a
satisfactory front. He is only dimly aware of what
is going on. I do not believe that Mr. Truman is a
conscious party to the great conspiracy. [ . . .] It
is when we return to an examination of General
Marshall’s record since the spring of 1942 that
we approach an explanation. [ . . .] It was
Marshall, who [ . . .] sought to compel the British
to invade across the Channel in the fall of 1942.
[ . . .] It was Marshall who [ . . .] fought the
British desire [ . . .] to advance from Italy into
the eastern plains of Europe ahead of the
Russians. It was a Marshall-sponsored
memorandum, advising appeasement of Russia in
Europe and the enticement of Russia into the
far-eastern war, [ . . .] which foreshadowed our
whole course at Tehran, at Yalta, and until now in
the Far East. [ . . .]
It was Marshall who sent Deane to Moscow to
collaborate with Harriman in drafting the terms of
the wholly unnecessary bribe paid to Stalin at
Yalta. It was Marshall, with Hiss at his elbow
[ . . .] who submitted intelligence reports which
suppressed more truthful estimates in order to
support his argument, and who finally induced
Roosevelt to bring Russia into the Japanese war
with a bribe that reinstated Russia in its pre-1904
imperialistic position in Manchuria—an act which,
in effect, signed the death warrant of the
Republic of China.
It was Marshall, with Acheson and Vincent
eagerly assisting, who created the China policy
which, destroying China, robbed us of a great and
friendly ally, a buffer against the Soviet
imperialism with which we are now at war [ . . .].

Emanuel Josephson, Rockefeller “Internationalist”

It was Marshall who [ . . .] besought the
reinstatement of forty millions in lend-lease for
Russia [ . . .].
It is Marshall-Acheson strategy for Europe to
build the defense of Europe solely around the
Atlantic Pact nations, excluding the two great
wells of anti-Communist manpower in Western
Germany and Spain and spurning the organized
armies of Greece and Turkey. [ . . .]
What is the objective of the great conspiracy? I
think it is clear from what has occurred and is
now occurring: to diminish the United States in
world affairs, to weaken us militarily, to confuse
our spirit with talk of surrender in the Far East
and to impair our will to resist evil. To what end?
To the end that we shall be contained, frustrated
and finally: fall victim to Soviet intrigue from
within and Russian military might from without.
[ . . .]
It is the great crime of the Truman
administration that it has refused to undertake
the job of ferreting the enemy from its ranks. I
once puzzled over that refusal. The President, I
said, is a loyal American; why does he not lead in
this enterprise? I think that I know why he does
not. The President is not master in his own
house. Those who are master there not only
have a desire to protect the sappers and
miners—they could not do otherwise. They
themselves are not free. They belong to a larger
conspiracy, the world-wide web of which has
been spun from Moscow. [ . . .] The time has
come to halt this tepid, milk-and-water
acquiescence which a discredited administration,
ruled by disloyalty, sends down to us. [ . . .] The
time has come for us to realize that the people
who sent us here expect more than time-serving
from us. [ . . .] The America that I know [ . . .]
deserves to be led not to humiliation or defeat,
but to victory.
Source
Congressional Record, Proceedings and Debates of
the Eighty-Second Congress, First Session. 1951.
Vol. 97, pt. 5. Washington, DC: Government
Printing Office, 6601–6603.

Emanuel Josephson, Rockefeller
“Internationalist” (1952)
Emanuel Josephson’s 1952 book constituted one of
the first attempts to paint John D. Rockefeller and
his family as part of an international conspiracy to
destroy national sovereignties through the use of
philanthropies and control of “big business.”
U.S Betrayed: “Whodunit?”
For the fourth time within half a century, the
people of the United States have found
themselves drawn into and forced to fight a war
that was not their concern and in which it was not
their desire or will to participate. On each
occasion the nation was tricked into war by the
same clique. The more observant and intelligent
sections of the public have sensed that there is a
power behind and above the government that
controls it and dictates its actions without the
regard of the will of the people. That power has
thus far been immune to exposure.
So insolently confident has this power become
that in the last two wars precipitated by them,
World War II and the Korean War, they have not
even made a pretense of complying with the form
prescribed by the Constitution, declaration of war
by Congress. In violation of the Constitution, the
United States has been thrown into wars by
“royal” edict issued by the power behind the
government, though ostensibly at the instance of
the Presidents who have been their puppets, after
incidents obviously incited by them through their
pawns in our own and foreign governments.
There can be no question, at this late date, that
our Government in Washington, for several
decades past, has been and now is, very largely
composed of subversives, Communists and their
fellow travelers and traitors. Only a few of them
have as yet openly confessed their betrayal of our
land to Communist Russia and to other foreign
agencies. A large number have been exposed as
involved in the treason. A very small fraction of
the number involved have been caught in the act
of treason or perjury in connection with treason,
and convicted. The trials and convictions of Alger

813

Reece Committee Report

Hiss, Judy Coplon and William Remington, and
the confession of Lee Pressman, among others,
have given the nation at the expense of millions of
dollars, legal proof of what has been obvious for
decades to the intelligent citizenry—that the
nation has been betrayed persistently by treason
of a wide array of public servants who range from
the top policy-makers, such as the “father” of the
United Nations, former Assistant Secretary of
State, Alger Hiss, to the lowliest clerks. . . .
Nevertheless the conspirators in our midst seek
to gain our submission to the Communists by
creating craven terror of our own bombs in our
midst. One begins to wonder if they actually
conceive of using our bombs against us, or
holding them until the Communist conspirators
take over and use them against us. In many
respects the situation resembles that of children
trembling before a bugaboo that they have
created with their own hands. Infinitely sad and
damaging is the spectacle of craven cowardice and
hysterical terror which they seek to have us
present to the world. They are aiding and abetting
our enemies by undermining our morale at home
and our prestige abroad. . . .
The authors and directors of our destiny and
the masters of our national fate, stepped out on
the scene and into the open to claim credit and
acclaim for putting us on the international merrygo-round. In the December 30, 1950, and
subsequent issues of the Saturday Evening Post
there appeared a series of articles, the first of
which was entitled The Rockefellers: The Story of
Five Young Millionaires. In these articles the
Rockefellers, with characteristic “modesty,” take
the bow as Messrs. “Internationalism.” The author
states that they allege that their “philanthropies”
transcend all bounds of national interest or
patriotism. Like the rest of the “internationalist”
breed, it appears that they scorn patriotism as
reprehensible and undesirable because it
interferes with their schemes. The sole ultimate
criterion of desirability is stated in the articles to
be profit to themselves. On that basis, the
“internationalist” activities have been highly
desirable to them, because, undeniably, they have
814

been highly profitable for them, however
disastrous they are for us, the “peasantry,”
individually, and for our country. For it is we who
have had to foot the bills for the expansion of the
“internationalist” interests of the Rockefeller
Empire, with our fortunes, our liberties and in
many cases, our lives.
Source
Josephson, Emanuel M. 1952. Rockefeller
“Internationalist”: The Man Who Misrules the
World. New York: Chedney, 8–9, 14, 15. ©
Emanuel Josephson. All rights reserved.

Reece Committee Report (1954)
The Congressional Committee to Investigate TaxExempt Foundations (known as the Reece Committee) concluded that although the major philanthropic organizations did seem to be pushing
forward a globalist agenda that had intellectual
links with communism, they were not part of a
deliberate, conscious conspiracy. What to call
something that appears to be a conspiracy has
bedeviled many a political commentator on both
ends of the political spectrum.
It is the conclusion of this committee that such
a combine does exist and that its impact upon our
society is that of an intellectual cartel. The
statement filed with the Committee by the
American Council of Learned Societies is typical
of the generality of the foundations in
emphatically denying the existence of a
“conspiracy” among the operating organizations
and foundations. This Committee does not see
any evidence that the concentration of power
arose as the result of a “conspiracy.” It has not
been created as the result of a plot by a single
group of identifiable individuals. It has not been
“created” at all, in the sense of a conscious plan
having been worked out in advance to construct
and implement its essentials. It has, however,
happened.
Source
U.S. Congress. 1954. Reece Committee Report. 83d
Cong., 2d sess., p. 39.

Doolittle Committee, “Report on the Covert Activities of the Central Intelligence Agency”

Doolittle Committee, “Report on
the Covert Activities of the Central
Intelligence Agency” (1954)
In 1954 President Dwight Eisenhower commissioned General James Doolittle to investigate the
CIA’s operations. In the resulting report, Doolittle
offered shocking advice. He recommended covert
action that was more aggressive, unique, and even
more ruthless than that of the Soviets. He also suggested that the United States might have to reconsider treasured beliefs such as “fair play,” revealing
the philosophy that lay behind some of the CIA’s
more extreme and infamous activities.
The acquisition and proper evaluation of
adequate and reliable intelligence on the
capabilities and intentions of Soviet Russia is
today’s most important military and political
requirement. Several agencies of Government and
many thousands of capable and dedicated people
are engaged in the accomplishments of this task.
Because the United States is relatively new at the
game, and because we are opposed by a police
state enemy whose social discipline and whose
security measures have been built up and
maintained at a high level for many years, the
usable information we are obtaining is still far
short of our needs.
As long as it remains national policy, another
important requirement is a more aggressive covert
psychological, political and paramilitary
organization than that employed by the enemy.
No one should be permitted to stand in the way
of the prompt, efficient and secure
accomplishment of this mission.
In the carrying out of this policy and in order to
reach minimal standards for national safety under
present world conditions, two things must be
done. First, the agencies charged by law with the
collection, evaluation and distribution of
intelligence must be strengthened and coordinated
to the greatest practical degree. This is a primary
concern of the National Security Council and must
be accomplished at the national security policy
level. Those developments of the problem that fall
within the scope of our directive are dealt with in

the report which follows. The second
consideration is less tangible but equally
important. It is now clear that we are facing an
implacable enemey whose avowed objective is
world domination by whatever means and at
whatever cost. There are no rules in such a game.
Hitherto acceptable norms of human conduct do
not apply. If the United States is to survive, longstanding American concepts of “fair play” must be
reconsidered. We must develop effective
espionage and counterespionage services and must
learn to subvert, sabotage and destroy our enemies
by more clever, more sophisticated and more
effective methods than those used against us. It
may become necessary that the American people
be made acquainted with, and understand and
support this fundamentally repugnant philosophy.
Because of the tight security controls that have
been established by the U.S.S.R. and its satellites,
the problem of infiltration by human agents is
extremely difficult. Most borders are made
physically secure by elaborate systems of fencing,
lights, mines, etc., backed by constant
surveillance. Once across borders—by parachute
or other means—escape from detection is
extremely difficult because of constant checks on
personnel activities and personal documentation.
The information we have obtained by this method
of acquisition has been negligible and the cost in
effort, dollars and human lives prohibitive.
This leads to the conviction that much more
effort should be expended in exploring every
possible scientific and technical avenue of
approach to the intelligence problem. The study
group has been extensively briefed by C.I.A.
personnel and by the Armed Services in the
methods and equipment that are presently in use
and under development in this area. We have also
had the benefit of advice from certain civilian
consultants who are working on such special
projects. We are impressed by what has been
done, but feel that there is an immense potential
yet to be explored. We believe that every known
technique should be intensively applied and new
ones should be developed to increase our
intelligence acquisition by [DELETED].
815

A. H. Belmont, “CPUSA—Counterintelligence Program”

II. Conclusions and Recommendations
With respect to the Central Intelligence Agency
in general we conclude: (a) that its placement in
the overall organization of the Government is
proper; (b) that the laws under which it operates
are adequate; (c) that the established provisions
for its financial support are sufficiently flexible to
meet its current operational needs; (d) that in
spite of the limitations imposed by its relatively
short life and rapid expansion it is doing a
creditable job; (e) that it is gradually improving its
capabilities; and (f) that it is exercising care to
ensure the loyalty of its personnel. [ . . .]
Source
“Report of the Special Study Group [Doolittle
Committee] on the Covert Activities of the
Central Intelligence Agency.” 30 September
1954. Washington, DC: Modern Military
Headquarters Branch, National Archives.

A. H. Belmont, “CPUSA—
Counterintelligence Program” (1956)
In August 1956, FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover
ordered the creation of extralegal “action programs”
designed to “cripple or destroy” the Communist
Party of the United States (CPUSA). Seeking to
make a substantial, if clandestine, contribution to
McCarthyism, Hoover believed it was the Bureau’s
task to undermine the CPUSA’s “ability to create
controversy.” Following Hoover’s secret directives,
the following memo, the first such COINTELPRO
document publicly available, was sent from A. Belmont, head of the FBI’s Internal Security Section, to
L. V. Boardman, the chief of counterintelligence. In
this document, the two section chiefs discuss how
they might combine their forces to “foster factionalism” and “cause confusion and dissatisfaction”
within the CPUSA. Echoing Hoover, Belmont recommends that the FBI turn their energies away
from previous projects of “harassment” and into a
deliberate campaign of “disruption.”
To: Mr. L. V. Boardman
From: Mr. A. H. Belmont
Date: August 28, 1956
816

Subject: CP, USA—
COUNTERINTELLIGENCE PROGRAM
INTERNAL SECURITY – C
During its investigation of the Communist
Party, USA, the Bureau has sought to capitalize
on incidents involving the Party and its leaders in
order to foster factionalism, bring the Communist
Party (CP) and its leaders into disrepute before
the American public and cause confusion and
dissatisfaction among rank-and-file members of
the CP.
Generally, the above action has constituted
harrassment rather than disruption, since, for the
most part, the Bureau has set up particular
incidents, and the attack has been from the
outside. At the present time, however, there is
existing within the CP a situation resulting from
the developments at the 20th Congress of the CP
of the Soviet Union and the Government’s attack
on the party principally through prosecutions
under the Smith Act of 1940 and the Internal
Security Act of 1950 which is made to order for
an all-out disruptive attack against the CP from
within. In other words, the Bureau is in a position
to initiate, on a broader scale than heretofore
attempted, a counterintelligence program against
the CP, not by harrassment from the outside,
which might only serve to bring the various
factions together, but by feeding and fostering
from within the internal fight currently raging.
Source
Churchill, Ward, and Jim Vander Wall. 1990. The
Cointelpro Papers. Boston: South End, 40.

Lee Harvey Oswald, “Historic Diary” (c. 1960)
Taken from Oswald’s controversial, evocative
diary, the following selections are part of his
account of life behind the Iron Curtain. President
Kennedy’s presumed assassin’s narrative provides a
detailed—though probably unreliable—account of
his negotiations with Soviet and American authorities in Moscow regarding his contested citizenship
status. It is in these details, the specific circumstances of the defection itself, and his later return to
the United States, that many authors have dis-

Lee Harvey Oswald, “Historic Diary”

cerned evidence of Oswald’s implication—whether
wittingly or not—in various conspiracies involving
the intelligence apparatus of either (or both) of the
cold war superpowers.
Oct. 16. Arrive from Helsinki by train; am met
by Intourest Repre. and in car to Hotel “Berlin.”
Reges. as “studet” 5 day Lux. tourist. Ticket.)
Meet my Intorist guied Rimma Sherikova I
explain to her I wish to appli. for Rus. citizenship.
She is flabbergassed, but aggrees to help [ . . .].
[ . . .]
Sun Oct. 18. My 20th birthday, we visit exhib.
in the morning and in the after noon The LeninStalin tomb. She [i.e., Rimma] gives me a present
Book “Ideot” by Dostoevski.
[ . . .]
Oct. 20. Rimmer in the afternoon says Intourist
was notified by the pass & visa dept. that they
want to see me I am excited greatly by this news.
Oct. 21. (mor) Meeting with single offial.
Balding stout, black suit fairly good English, askes
what do I want?, I say Sovite citizenship, he asks
why I give vauge answers about “Great Soviet
Union” He tells me “USSR only great in
Literature wants me to go back home” I am
stunned I reiterate, he says he shall check and let
me know weather my visa will be (extended it
exipiers today) Eve. 6.00 Recive word from police
official. I must leave country tonight at. 8.00 P.M.
as visa expirs. I am shocked!! My dreams! I retire
to my room. I have $100. left. I have waited 2
year to be accepted. My fondes dreams are
shattered because of a petty offial; because of bad
planning I planned to much! 7.00 P.M. I decide to
end it. Soak rist in cold water to numb the pain.
Than slash my leftwrist. Than plang wrist into
bathtub of hot water. I think when Rimma comes
at 8. to find me dead it will be a great shock.
somewhere, a violin plays, as I wacth my life whirl
away. I think to myself: “how easy to die” and “a
sweet death, (to violins) about 8.00 Rimma finds
my unconscious (bathtub water a rich red color)
she screams (I remember that) and runs for help.
Amulance comes, am taken to hospital where five
stiches are put in my wrist. Poor Rimmea stays by

my side as interrpator (my Russian is still very
bad) far into the night, I tell her “go home” (my
mood is bad) but she stays, she is “my friend” She
has a strong will only at this moment I notice she
is preety [ . . .].
[ . . .]
Jan 4. I am called to passport office and finilly
given a Soviet document not the soviet citizenship
as I so wanted, only a Residence document, not
even for foringners but a paper called “for those
without citizenship.” Still I am happy. The offial
says they are sending me to the city of “Minsk” I
ask “is that in Siberia? He only laughes. he also
tells me that they have arranged for me to recive
some money though the Red Cross to pay my
hotel bills and expensis. I thank the gentlemen
and leave later in the afternoon I see Rimma “she
asks are you happy” “yes”
Jan.5. I go to Red Cross in Moscow for money
with Interrupter (a new one) I recive 5000. rubles
a huge sum!! Later in Mink I am to earn 70 rubles
a month at the [Radio and Television] factory.
Jan.7. [1960] I leave Moscow by train for
Minsk, Belorussia. My hotel bill 2200 rubles and
the train ticket to Minsk 150. rubles so I have alot
of money & hope. I wrote my brother and mother
letters in which I said “I do not wish to ever
contact you again.” I am begnining anew life and I
don’t want any part of the old.”
[ . . .]
Aug-Sept. As my Russian improves I become
increasingly conscious of just what sort of a sociaty
I live in. mass gymnastics, compulsary after work
meeting, usually political information meeting.
Complusary attendance at lectures and the
sending of the entire shop collective (except me)
to pick potatoes on a Sunday, at a State collective
farm. A “patroict duty” to bring in the harvest.
The opions of the wokers (unvoiced) are that it is
a great pain in the neck. They don’t seem to be
esspicialy enthusiastic about any of the
“collective” duties a natural feeling.
[ . . .]
Jan 4–31 [1961] I am stating to reconsider my
disire about staying. The work is drab the money I
get has nowhere to be spent. No nightclubs or
817

Warren Commission Report

bowling allys no places of recreation acept trade
union dances I have had enough.
Feb. 1st. Make my first request to American
Embassy, Moscow, for reconsidering my position,
I stated “I would like to go back to U.S.”
[ . . .]
March 17. I and Erich went to trade union
dance. Boring but at the last hour I am
introduced to a girl with a French hair-do and
red-dress with white slipper I dance with her.
than ask to show her home I do, along with 5
other admirares Her name is Marina. We like
each right away [ . . .].
Source
Oswald, Lee Harvey. 1964. “Historic Diary.” In
President’s Commission on the Assassination of
President Kennedy, Warren Commission Exhibit
#24, Hearings and Exhibits. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Press, 16: 94–95, 98,
100, 102.

Warren Commission Report (1964)
The Warren Commission, the official government
inquiry into the assassination of President
Kennedy, concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald acted
alone and hence, there was no conspiracy. The following selection from the final report includes the
summary of the main findings, as well as the Commission’s consideration of rumors about various
conspiracies.
THE ASSASSINATION of John Fitzgerald
Kennedy on November 22, 1963, was a cruel and
shocking act of violence directed against a man, a
family, a nation, and against all mankind. A young
and vigorous leader whose years of public and
private life stretched before him was the victim of
the fourth Presidential assassination in the history
of a country dedicated to the concepts of
reasoned argument and peaceful political change.
This Commission was created on November 29,
1963, in recognition of the right of people
everywhere to full and truthful knowledge
concerning these events. This report endeavors to
fulfill that right and to appraise this tragedy by the
818

light of reason and the standard of fairness. It has
been prepared with a deep awareness of the
Commission’s responsibility to present to the
American people an objective report of the facts
relating to the assassination. [ . . .]
This Commission was created to ascertain the
facts relating to the preceding summary of events
and to consider the important questions which
they raised. The Commission has addressed itself
to this task and has reached certain conclusions
based on all the available evidence. No limitations
have been placed on the Commission’s inquiry; it
has conducted its own investigation, and all
Government agencies have fully discharged their
responsibility to cooperate with the Commission
in its investigation. These conclusions represent
the reasoned judgment of all members of the
Commission and are presented after an
investigation which has satisfied the Commission
that it: has ascertained the truth concerning the
assassination of President Kennedy to the extent
that a prolonged and thorough search makes this
possible.
1. The shots which killed President Kennedy
and wounded Governor Connally were fired from
the sixth floor window at the southeast corner of
the Texas School Book Depository. This
determination is based upon the following:
*(a) Witnesses at the scene of the assassination
saw a rifle being fired from the sixth floor window
of the Depository Building, and some witnesses
saw a rifle in the window immediately after the
shots were fired.
*(b) The nearly whole bullet found on
Governor Connally’s stretcher at Parkland
Memorial Hospital and the two bullet fragments
found in the front seat of the Presidential
limousine were fired from the 6.5-millimeter
Mannlicher-Carcano rifle found on the sixth floor
of the Depository Building to the exclusion of all
other weapons.
*(c) The three used cartridge cases found near
the window on the sixth floor at the southeast
corner of the building were fired from the same
rifle which fired the above-described bullet and
fragments, to the exclusion of all other weapons.

Warren Commission Report

*(d) The windshield in the Presidential
limousine was struck by a bullet fragment on the
inside surface of the glass, but was not
penetrated.
*(e) The nature of the bullet wounds suffered
by President Kennedy and Governor Connally
and the location of the car at the time of the shots
establish that the bullets were fired from above
and behind the Presidential limousine, striking
the President and the Governor as follows:
1. President Kennedy was first struck by a bullet
which entered at the back of his neck and exited
through the lower front portion of his neck, causing
a wound which would not necessarily have been
lethal. The President was struck a second time by a
bullet which entered the right-rear portion of his
head, causing a massive and fatal wound.
2. Governor Connally was struck by a bullet
which entered on the right side of his back and
traveled downward through the right side of his
chest, exiting below his right nipple. This bullet
then passed through his right wrist and entered
his left thigh where it caused a superficial wound.
[. . .]
*(f) There is no credible evidence that the shots
were fired from the Triple Underpass, ahead of
the motorcade, or from any other location.
[. . .]
4. The weight of the evidence indicates that
there were three shots fired.
5. Although it is not necessary to any essential
findings of the Commission to determine just
which shot hit Governor Connally, there is very
persuasive evidence from the experts to indicate
that the same bullet which pierced the President’s
throat also caused Governor Connally’s wounds.
However, Governor Connally’s testimony and
certain other factors have given rise to some
difference of opinion as to this probability but
there is no question in the mind of any member
of the Commission that all the shots which caused
the President’s and Governor Connally’s wounds
were fired from the sixth floor window of the
Texas School Book Depository.
6. The shots which killed President Kennedy
and wounded Governor Connally were fired by

Lee Harvey Oswald. This conclusion is based
upon the following:
*(a) The Mannlicher-Carcano 6.5-millimeter
Italian rifle from which the shots were fired was
owned by and in the possession of Oswald.
*(b) Oswald carried this rifle into the
Depository Building on the morning of November
22, 1963.
*(c) Oswald, at the time of the assassination,
was present at the window from which the shots
were fired.
*(d) Shortly after the assassination, the
Mannlicher-Carcano rifle belonging to Oswald
was found partially hidden between some cartons
on the sixth floor and the improvised paper bag in
which Oswald brought the rifle to the Depository
was found close by the window from which the
shots were fired.
*(e) Based on testimony of the experts and
their analysis of films of the assassination, the
Commission has concluded that a rifleman of Lee
Harvey Oswald’s capabilities could have fired the
shots from the rifle used in the assassination
within the elapsed time of the shooting. The
Commission has concluded further that Oswald
possessed the capability with a rifle which enabled
him to commit the assassination.
*(f) Oswald lied to the police after his arrest
concerning important substantive matters.
*(g) Oswald had attempted to kill Maj. Gen.
Edwin A. Walker (Retired, U.S. Army) on April
10, 1963, thereby demonstrating his disposition to
take human life.
[ . . .]
9. The Commission has found no evidence that
either Lee Harvey Oswald or Jack Ruby was part
of any conspiracy, domestic or foreign, to
assassinate President Kennedy. The reasons for
this conclusion are:
*(a) The Commission has found no evidence
that anyone assisted Oswald in planning or
carrying out the assassination. In this connection
it has thoroughly investigated, among other
factors, the circumstances surrounding the
planning of the motorcade route through Dallas,
the hiring of Oswald by the Texas School Book
819

Warren Commission Report

Depository Co. on October 15, 1963, the method
by which the rifle was brought into the building,
the placing of cartons of books at the window,
Oswald’s escape from the building, and the
testimony of eyewitnesses to the shooting.
*(b) The Commission has found no evidence
that Oswald was involved with any person or
group in a conspiracy to assassinate the President,
although it has thoroughly investigated, in
addition to other possible leads, all facets of
Oswald’s associations, finances, and personal
habits, particularly during the period following his
return from the Soviet Union in June 1962.
*(c) The Commission has found no evidence to
show that Oswald was employed, persuaded, or
encouraged by any foreign government to
assassinate President Kennedy or that he was an
agent of any foreign government, although the
Commission has reviewed the circumstances
surrounding Oswald’s defection to the Soviet
Union, his life there from October of 1959 to
June of 1962 so far as it can be reconstructed, his
known contacts with the Fair Play for Cuba
Committee and his visits to the Cuban and Soviet
Embassies in Mexico City during his trip to
Mexico from September 26 to October 3, 1963,
and his known contacts with the Soviet Embassy
in the United States.
*(d) The Commission has explored all attempts
of Oswald to identify himself with various political
groups, including the Communist Party, U.S.A.,
the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, and the
Socialist Workers Party, and has been unable to
find any evidence that the contacts which he
initiated were related to Oswald’s subsequent
assassination of the President.
*(e) All of the evidence before the Commission
established that there was nothing to support the
speculation that Oswald was an agent, employee,
or informant of the FBI, the CIA, or any other
governmental agency. It has thoroughly
investigated Oswald’s relationships prior to the
assassination with all agencies of the U.S.
Government. All contacts with Oswald by any of
these agencies were made in the regular exercise
of their different responsibilities.
820

*(f) No direct or indirect relationship between
Lee Harvey Oswald and Jack Ruby has been
discovered by the Commission, nor has it been
able to find any credible evidence that either
knew the other, although a thorough investigation
was made of the many rumors and speculations of
such a relationship.
*(g) The Commission has found no evidence
that Jack Ruby acted with any other person in the
killing of Lee Harvey Oswald.
*(h) After careful investigation the Commission
has found no credible evidence either that Ruby
and Officer Tippit, who was killed by Oswald,
knew each other or that Oswald and Tippit knew
each other.
Because of the difficulty of proving negatives to
a certainty the possibility of others being involved
with either Oswald or Ruby cannot be established
categorically, but if there is any such evidence it
has been beyond the reach of all the investigative
agencies and resources of the United States and
has not come to the attention of this Commission.
[. . .]
6. In its entire investigation the Commission
has found no evidence of conspiracy, subversion,
or disloyalty to the U.S. Government by any
Federal, State, or local official.
7. On the basis of the evidence before the
Commission it concludes that Oswald acted alone.
Therefore, to determine the motives for the
assassination of President Kennedy, one must look
to the assassin himself. Clues to Oswald’s motives
can be found in his family history, his education or
lack of it, his acts, his writings, and the recollections
of those who had close contacts with him throughout his life. The Commission has presented with
this report all of the background information
bearing on motivation which it could discover.
Thus, others may study Lee Oswald’s life and arrive
at their own conclusions as to his possible motives.
The Commission could not make any definitive
determination of Oswald’s motives. It has
endeavored to isolate factors which contributed to
his character and which might have influenced his
decision to assassinate President Kennedy. These
factors were:

Warren Commission Report

*(a) His deep-rooted resentment of all
authority which was expressed in a hostility
toward every society in which he lived;
*(b) His inability to enter into meaningful
relationships with people, and a continuous
pattern of rejecting his environment in favor of
new surroundings;
*(c) His urge to try to find a place in history
and despair at times over failures in his various
undertakings;
*(d) His capacity for violence as evidenced by
his attempt to kill General Walker;
*(e) His avowed commitment to Marxism and
communism, as he understood the terms and
developed his own interpretation of them; this
was expressed by his antagonism toward the
United States, by his defection to the Soviet
Union, by his failure to be reconciled with life in
the United States even after his disenchantment
with the Soviet Union, and by his efforts, though
frustrated, to go to Cuba.
Each of these contributed to his capacity to risk
all in cruel and irresponsible actions.
[ . . .]
CONSPIRATORIAL RELATIONSHIPS
Rumors concerning accomplices and plots
linked Oswald and Ruby with each other, or with
others, including Patrolman J. D. Tippit, Gen.
Edwin A. Walker, and Bernard Weissman of the
nonexistent American Fact-finding Committee, in
a conspiratorial relationship. The Commission
made intensive inquiry into the backgrounds and
relationships of Oswald and Ruby to determine
whether they knew each other or were involved in
a plot of any kind with each other or others. It
was unable to find any credible evidence to
support the rumors linking Oswald and Ruby
directly or through others. The Commission
concluded that they were not involved in a
conspiratorial relationship with each other or with
any third parties.
[ . . .]
Speculation.—Since Oswald did not have the
money to repay the $435.61 he had received from
the Department of State to cover part of the
expenses of his return from Russia, he must have

received help from some other source. Ruby lent
Oswald money to pay back the loan and lent him
small amounts of money thereafter.
Commission finding.—The Commission has no
credible evidence that Oswald received any
money from Ruby or anyone else to repay his
State Department loan, nor that he received small
amounts of money from Ruby at any time. An
exhaustive analysis of Oswald’s income and
expenditures, made for the Commission by an
Internal Revenue Service expert, reveals that
Oswald had sufficient funds to make the State
Department repayments from his earnings.
Speculation.—Just before Oswald was shot by
Ruby, he looked directly at Ruby in apparent
recognition of him.
Commission finding.—The Commission has
been unable to establish as a fact any kind of
relationship between Ruby and Oswald other than
that Oswald was Ruby’s victim. The Commission
has examined television tapes and motion picture
films of the shooting and has been unable to
discern any facial expression that could be
interpreted to signify recognition of Ruby or
anyone else in the basement of the building.
Speculation.—The Dallas police suspected
Oswald and Ruby of being involved in an attack
on General Walker and planned to arrest the two
when the FBI intervened, at the request of
Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, and asked
the police not to do so for reasons of state.
Commission finding.—This allegation appeared
in the November 29, 1963, issue (actually printed
on November 25 or 26) of a German weekly
newspaper, Deutsche National Zeiting und
Soldaten Zeitung, published in Munich. The
allegation later appeared in the National Enquirer
of May 17, 1964. The Commission has been
reliably informed that the statement was
fabricated by an editor of the newspaper. No
evidence in support of this statement has ever
been advanced or uncovered. In their
investigation of the attack on General Walker, the
Dallas police uncovered no suspects and planned
no arrests. The FBI had no knowledge that
Oswald was responsible for the attack until
821

Carroll Quigley, Tragedy and Hope

Marina Oswald revealed the information on
December 3, 1963.
Speculation.—Ruby and Oswald were seen
together at the Carousel Club.
Commission finding.—All assertions that
Oswald was seen in the company of Ruby or of
anyone else at the Carousel Club have been
investigated. None of them merits any credence.
Speculation.—Oswald and General Walker
were probably acquainted with each other since
Oswald’s notebook contained Walker’s name and
telephone number.
Commission finding.—Although Oswald’s
notebook contained Walker’s name and telephone
number there was no evidence that the two knew
each other. It is probable that this information was
inserted at the time that Oswald was planning his
attack on Walker. General Walker stated that he
did not know of Oswald before the assassination.
[ . . .]
Speculation.—Jack Ruby was one of the most
notorious of Dallas gangsters.
Commission finding.—There is no credible
evidence that Jack Ruby was active in the criminal
underworld. Investigation disclosed no one in
either Chicago or Dallas who had any knowledge
that Ruby was associated with organized criminal
activity.
Source
Report of the President’s Commission on the
Assassination of President Kennedy. 1964.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office. Available at http://www.archives.gov/
research_room/jfk/warren_commission/warren_
commission_report.html.

Carroll Quigley, Tragedy and Hope (1966)
Tragedy and Hope, a 1966 book by Georgetown University professor Carroll Quigley, is often cited as the
“smoking gun” by conspiracy theorists who believe
that there is a vast cabal plotting to take over American sovereignty in the name of a New World Order.
The significance of Quigley’s text is heightened, in the
eyes of these observers, by the fact that Quigley was
President Clinton’s college mentor. The second para822

graph of the following passage is most often quoted as
proof, but it must be noted that Quigley emphasizes
how far removed from the “radical Right fairy tale”
his analysis of globalist politics is.
The radical Right version of these events [ . . .]
was even more remote from the truth [ . . .],
although it had a tremendous impact on American
opinion and American relations with other
countries in the years 1947–1955. This radical
Right fairy tale, which is now an accepted folk
myth in many groups in America, pictured the
recent history of the United States, in regard to
domestic reform and in foreign affairs, as a wellorganized plot by extreme Left-wing elements,
operating from the White House itself and
controlling all the chief avenues of publicity in the
United States, to destroy the American way of
life, based on private enterprise, laissez faire, and
isolationism, in behalf of alien ideologies of
Russian Socialism and British cosmopolitanism (or
internationalism). [ . . .]
This myth, like all fables, does in fact have a
modicum of truth. There does exist, and has
existed for a generation, an international
anglophile network which operates, to some
extent, in the way the radical Right believes the
communists act. In fact, this network, which we
may identify as the Round Table Groups, has no
aversion to cooperating with the Communists, or
any other groups and frequently does so. I know
of the operations of this network because I have
studied it for twenty years and was permitted for
two years, in the early 1960’s, to examine its
papers and secret records. I have no aversion to it
or to most of its aims and have, for much of my
life, been close to it and to many of its
instruments. I have objected, both in the past and
recently, to a few of its policies [ . . .] but in
general my chief difference of opinion is that it
wishes to remain unknown, and I believe its role
in history is significant enough to be known.
Source
Quigley, Carroll. 1966. Tragedy and Hope: A History
of the World in Our Time. New York: Macmillan,
949–950.

Robert H.W. Welch, “The Truth in Time”

Elijah Muhammad, Message to the
Blackman in America (1965)
In this extract from his 1965 book Message to the
Blackman in America, Elijah Muhammad puts forward his view on “The Plan to Destroy Our Race.”
The American so-called Negroes are gravely
deceived by the slave-masters’ teaching of God
and the true religion of God. They do not know
they are deceived and earnestly believe they are
right regardless of how vile the white race may be.
My poor people are mentally blind, deaf and
dumb and full of fear. Blind because they do not
see the light of truth after being shown it for over
thirty years. Deaf because they will not hear the
truth, Islam that has come to them from Allah
through the Messenger (myself).
They are dumb because they will not see or
open their ears and hearts after the light has
shown clear for many years. You are full of the
fear that was instilled in you when you were
babies, so Allah told. This fear was put in you by
the white slave-masters through tortures,
lynchings, burnings, rapings and killings and has
caused you to be blind, deaf and dumb.
This fear of the white slave-master has caused
you to love them in a crazy kind of way. You, my
dear people, are like a woman desperately in love
with a man who does not love her. Therefore, this
love is blind. This man can beat, torture, ravage,
humiliate, shame and mock, but she will yet love
him. And even when someone tries to tell her that
his man is no good for her and certainly does not
love her, she will yet love him, and will become
angered and defend such a man. This is a very sad
thing, but a very true picture of the so-called
Negroes. They love their tormentors.
Beware, they do not love you, they are like dogs
with a bone. They do not want you to be taken by
Allah’s messenger to your salvation. They want to
carry you with them to their doom. The wicked
white devils are by no means asleep to the
knowledge of the time. They are really on the job
trying to keep all of those who are blind, deaf and
dumb to what is going on in this day and time
mentally dead. They watch every step of the

righteous Muslims, seeking to do them harm in
their endeavor to spread the truth (Islam).
The people of Allah (so-called Negroes) are
dumb to the time as the people were in the days
when Moses was sent to the Pharaoh to bring his
people out of bondage into a land wherein they
could enjoy independence. Instead of the
Israelites being joyful to hear that Allah was ready
to deliver them from Pharaoh and give them land
of their own, they set out to contend with Moses
and to help Pharaoh not God (Jehovah).
The government of Pharaoh had no love for
Israel, just as America has no love for the socalled Negroes. Pharaoh became afraid of the
truth that Moses was teaching his people in the
midst of his country.
So Pharaoh began to plan the death of Moses
and the future of Israel by killing off the babies.
Pharaoh wanted Moses put to death because he
was teaching his people the truth of Pharaoh and
his government of wickedness. Today, America is
afraid of the power our great number presents.
She fears that if we ever unite we would overnight
become independent.
America desires to keep us a subjected people.
So she, therefore, wants to stop our birth (as
Pharaoh did). The Birth Control Law or Act of
today is directed directly at the so-called Negroes
and not at the American whites. The story of
Moses and the Pharaoh is a warning to you today.
They are seeking to destroy our race by the birth
control law, just as Pharaoh sought to stop Moses’
race by killing off all the male babies at birth.
They are seeking to destroy our race through our
women. DO NOT LET THEM TRICK YOU.
Source
Elijah Muhammad. 1965. Message to the Blackman
in America. Chicago: Muhammad’s Temple No. 2.
© Elijah Muhammad. All rights reserved.

Robert H. W. Welch, “The
Truth in Time” (1966)
Robert Welch, the founder of the John Birch Society, briefly explains in this piece what he believed
to be the connection between the contemporary
823

Robert H. W. Welch, “The Truth in Time”

threat of communism and the longer history of the
master conspiracy dating back to the Illuminati.
To make the history of the great conspiracy both
clear and convincing, we need a hundred volumes
of a thousand pages each. And we hope that those
scholarly volumes will all be written in due course,
as a guide and a warning to future generations. But
at present we have a more immediate and more
urgent task. We want to give you simply an outline
of the progress of this organized evil force, from its
beginning up to the present time.
The aim of the conspirators always has been,
and still is, to impose the brutal tyranny of their
rule over the whole human race. Today they are at
last within striking distance of that ultimate goal.
And we agree with the Hon. J. Edgar Hoover,
who stated in the April 1961 FBI Law
Enforcement Bulletin, that “the way to fight it
[Communism] is to study it, understand it, and
discover what can be done about it.” We think
that the only way to stop the Communists is to
create sufficient understanding, soon enough,
among enough people, as to what is really taking
place all around us. So let’s do our best, within the
limits that are practicable for this occasion, to
review the whole fantastic story step by step.
The Early Background
1. We must hunt the first steps largely in the
shadows rather than in the substance of history.
For the conspiracy is deeprooted. Two hundred
years ago, or during the last half of the
Eighteenth Century, there were in Europe many
secret societies with grandiose dreams of
overthrowing all existing human institutions, and
of rising out of the resulting chaos as the allpowerful rulers of a “new order” of civilization. Of
these groups the Illuminati, founded in Bavaria by
Adam Weishaupt on May 1, 1776, was
undoubtedly the most important.
2. By 1789 the Illuminati were already strong
enough to have had a great deal to do with
planning and precipitating the holocaust known as
the French Revolution. In that upheaval we find
many elements of Communist strategy and
purpose with which we are familiar today. One
824

was the ruthless undermining of rulers and
governments in order to destroy them. Another
was the destruction of all religion by substituting
the worship of “reason” in its place. You will
remember that the revolutionaries erected in
Paris a statue to the “goddess of reason” as a
symbol of this change. A third element was the
fomenting by a few professional agitators of mob
action made to appear as a spontaneous uprising
of the people. A fourth was the massive use of
terror to silence all opposition. A fifth was the use
of manufactured smear to destroy the enemies of
the revolution or of its temporary leaders. And all
of these objectives and methods, which sound like
rehearsals for what is happening throughout the
world today, had either been specifically set forth
by Weishaupt for his order of Illuminati, or were
practical applications of his program.
3. By 1795 the French Revolution had run its
horrible course, and there was a gradual return
even in France to traditional beliefs, values, and
institutions. Although it led to the Napoleonic
wars which, for the next twenty years devastated
so much of Europe, this revolutionary fire in
France had failed to set off a continent-wide
social conflagration, as the Illuminati and similar
groups had hoped and planned. And henceforth
the Illuminati observed even more closely than
before the original Weishaupt instruction that the
very existence of the order should be denied and
kept secret at all costs. But the fact that the
Illuminati were active, at the end of the
Eighteenth Century, with growing reach and
influence in many countries, is clearly proved in
the detailed histories of Robinson and the Abbé
Barruel. And the short-lived Babeuf conspiracy
reveals that other groups, though possibly allied
or subsidiary to the Illuminati, were working for
the same totally destructive purposes.
During the Nineteenth Century some of these
secret societies and subversive groups appear to
have grown and coalesced into the Communist
conspiracy as we know it today. However hidden
the controlling nerve centers may have been, by
1848 some of the activities and even organizational
structures of the conspiracy were becoming visible.

J. Edgar Hoover, “Counterintelligence Program, Black Nationalist–Hate Groups”

The first important declaration of purposes, using
the name of Communism, as we understand the
word today, was issued by Karl Marx in 1848.
Communist plotting was at work, to some extent, in
the numerous uprisings of that year, 1848, as it has
been in almost all insurrections and wars involving
European nations since that time.
But the Communist movement is only a tool of
the total conspiracy. As secret as the Communist
activities and organizations generally appear, they
are part of an open book compared to the secrecy
enveloping some higher degree of this diabolic
force. The extrinsic evidence is strong and
convincing that by the beginning of the Twentieth
Century there had evolved an inner core of
conspiratorial power, able to direct and control
subversive activities which were worldwide in
their reach, incredibly cunning and ruthless in
their nature, and brilliantly farsighted and patient
in their strategy. Whether or not this increasingly
all-powerful hidden command was due to an
unbroken continuation of Weishaupt’s Illuminati,
or was a distillation from the leadership of this
and other groups, we do not know. Some of them
may never have been Communists, while others
were. To avoid as much dispute as possible,
therefore, let’s call this ruling clique simply the
INSIDERS. But we do need some such term for
both clarity and convenience. And it should be
recognized that always pushing and promoting
each other into higher positions, on every road to
power and wealth and fame, has been a vital part
of the strategy of this “fraternity” from the
beginning—and of the motivation of its members
at any given time. The goal for each generation of
conspirators, the tie that bound them together, lay
in what this self-perpetuating body was to
become; but the contemporary reward and
satisfaction was in becoming.
6. For more than a hundred years now the
conspiracy had pushed on steadily, along many
avenues, all leading to the one goal of world rule.
During the last half of the Nineteenth Century the
INSIDERS were using the Communists, the
anarchists, the socialists of various hues and kinds,
and dozens of other groups, to promote their

purposes. Many of these groups were largely
unconscious of how they were being spurred on
and guided by a few clever INSIDERS. While
under the guise of humanitarianism, and in the
pretended promotion of freedom and equality and
brotherhood, these INSIDERS, and the gullible
idealists who served as their dupes, were busily
undermining the very beliefs and institutions which
made the Nineteenth Century a highwater mark of
such civilization as man has laboriously achieved.
Source
Welch, Robert H. W., Jr. 1966. “The Truth in Time.”
American Opinion 9 (November): 1–4.
Reproduced with permission from the John Birch
Society.

J. Edgar Hoover, “Counterintelligence
Program, Black Nationalist–Hate Groups”
(1967)
During the summer of 1967, FBI Director J. Edgar
Hoover issued this document to all field offices
under the suggestive heading “Counterintelligence
Program, Black Nationalist–Hate Groups.” This
document ordered all field offices of the FBI to
immediately begin campaigns to “expose, disrupt,
misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize” every
branch of the civil rights movement. An unapologetic white supremacist and avowed enemy of Martin Luther King, Jr., Hoover believed that the civil
rights movement was communist inspired and
posed a threat to national security. With this document, Hoover unleashed the FBI against all African
American and civil rights organizations, ranging
from direct action groups like SNCC to Christian
nonviolent organizations like King’s SCLC, as well
as advocates of armed resistance like Stokely
Carmichael and H. Rap Brown.
SAC, Albany August 25, 1967
PERSONAL ATTENTION TO ALL
OFFICES
[From] Director, FBI
COUNTERINTELLIGENCE PROGRAM
BLACK NATIONALIST—HATE GROUPS
INTERNAL SECURITY
825

Donald M. MacArthur, “Testimony before a Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations”

[ . . .] The purpose of this new
counterintelligence endeavor is to expose, disrupt,
misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize the
activities of black nationalist hate-type
organizations and groupings, their leadership,
spokesmen, membership, and supporters, and to
counter their propensity for violence and civil
disorder. The activities of all such groups of
intelligence interest to the Bureau must be
followed on a continuous basis so we will be in a
position to promptly take advantage of all
opportunities for counterintelligence and inspire
action in instances where circumstances warrant.
The pernicious background of such groups, their
duplicity, and devious maneuvers must be exposed
to public scrutiny where such publicity will have a
neutralizing effect. Efforts of the various groups
to consolidate their forces or to recruit new or
youthful adherents must be frustrated. No
opportunity should be missed to exploit through
counterintelligence techniques the organizational
and personal conflicts of the leaderships of the
groups and where possible an effort should be
made to capitalize upon existing conflicts between
competing black nationalist organizations. When
an opportunity is apparent to disrupt or neutralize
black nationalist, hate-type organizations through
the cooperation of established local news media
contacts or through such contact with sources
available to the Seat of Government [Hoover’s
office], in every instance careful attention must be
given to the proposal to insure the targetted
group is disrupted, ridiculed, or discredited
through the publicity and not merely publicized.
[ . . .]
You are also cautioned that the nature of this
new endeavor is such that under no circumstances
should the existence of the program be made
known outside the Bureau and appropriate
within-office security should be afforded to
sensitive operations and techniques considered
under the program.
No counterintelligence action under this
program may be initiated by the field without
specific prior Bureau authorization.

826

Source
Churchill, Ward, and Jim Vander Wall. 1990. The
Cointelpro Papers. Boston: South End, 92–93.

Donald M. MacArthur, “Testimony before
a Subcommittee of the Committee on
Appropriations” (1 July 1969)
For many who believe that HIV and AIDS was
man-made in a laboratory (either by accident or as
part of a covert biowarfare program), the following
congressional testimony of Dr. Donald MacArthur,
director of the Advanced Research Project Agency
of the Department of Defense, is the “smoking gun”
that proves the conspiracy.
DR. MACARTHUR: There are two things
about the biological agent field I would like to
mention. One is the possibility of technology
surprise. Molecular biology is a field that is
advancing very rapidly and eminent biologists
believe that within a period of five to 10 years it
would be possible to produce a synthetic
biological agent, an agent that does not naturally
exist and for which no natural immunity could
have been acquired.
REP. SIKES: Are we doing any work in that
field?
DR. MACARTHUR: We are not.
REP. SIKES: Why not? Lack of money or lack
of interest?
DR. MACARTHUR: Certainly not lack of
interest.
REP. SIKES: Would you provide for our
records information on what would be required,
what the advantages of such a program would be?
The time and the cost involved?
DR. MACARTHUR: We will be very happy to.
The information follows:
The dramatic progress being made in the field
of molecular biology led us to investigate the
relevance of this field of science to biological
warfare. A small group of experts considered this
matter and provided the following observations.

“Report on CIA Chilean Task Force Activities”

1. All biological agents up to the present time
are representatives of naturally occurring disease,
and are thus known to scientists throughout the
world. They are easily available to qualified
scientists for research, either for offensive or
defensive purposes.
2. Within the next five to 10 years, it would
probably be possible to make a new infective
microorganism which could differ in certain
important aspects from any known diseasecausing organisms. Most important of these is that
it might be refractory to the immunological and
therapeutic processes upon which we depend to
maintain our relative freedom from infectious
disease.
3. A research program to explore the feasibility
of this could be completed in approximately five
years at a total cost of $10 million.
4. It would be very difficult to establish such a
program. Molecular biology is a relatively new
science. There are not many highly competent
scientists in the field, almost all are in university
laboratories, and they are generally adequately
supported from sources other than the DOD.
However, it was considered possible to initiate an
adequate program through the National Academy
of Sciences—National Research Council (NASNRC), and tentative plans were made to initiate
the program. However, decreasing funds in CB,
growing criticism of the CB program, and our
reluctance to involve the NAS-NRC in such a
controversial endeavor have led us to postpone it
for the past two years.
It is a highly controversial issue and there are
many who believe such research should not be
undertaken lest it lead to yet another method of
massive killing of large populations. On the other
hand, without the sure scientific knowledge that
such a weapon is possible, and an understanding
of the ways it could be done, there is little that
can be done to devise defensive measures. Should
an enemy develop it there is little doubt that
there is an important area of potential military
technology inferiority in which there is no
adequate research program.

Source
House of Representatives. Department of Defense
Appropriations for 1970. 91st Cong., 1st sess.

“Report on CIA Chilean Task
Force Activities” (1970)
This internal CIA document outlines the agency’s
actions in Chile in 1973. The CIA was involved in
the coup that overthrew the country’s democratically elected socialist government and resulted in
the death of the leader, Salvador Allende.
1. General
a. On 15 September 1970, CIA was directed to
try to prevent Marxist Salvador Allende’s assent to
the Chilean Presidency on 3 November. This
effort was to be independent of concurrent
endeavours being undertaken through, or with the
knowledge of, the 40 committee, Department of
State, and Ambassador Korry.
b. Briefly, the situation at the time was the
following:
—Allende had attained a plurality of only some
40,000 in the Chilean popular vote for president.
Jorge Alessandri, a conservative and the runnerup, would face Allende in a congressional run-off
on 24 October. The run-off winner would be
invested as president on 3 November.
—Allende’s designation as president by
Congress was very probable given all known
factors in the Chilean political equation.
—Given the dismal prospects of a political
formula being worked out to prevent Allende’s
designation as president by Congress, remaining
alternatives centered around overcoming the
apolitical, constitutional-oriented inertia of the
Chilean military.
—U.S. government intentions were highly
suspect particularly in Allende and certain
government sectors. Suspicions extended to all
Americans in Chile for whatever declared
purpose. In addition the Chilean military were
being monitored quite closely by the Allende

827

“The Torbitt Document”

forces for warning signals of any interventionist
proclivities.
2. Special Organisation
a. A Chilean Task Force was assembled and
functioning three days after CIA was assigned the
mission. It was headed by —— and highlyqualified CIA —— recalled from their ——.
Source
“Report on CIA Chilean Task Force Activities, 15
September to 3 November 1970.” George
Washington University National Security Archive.
Available at http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/
NSAEBB/NSAEBB8/nsaebb8.htm.

“The Torbitt Document” (1970s)
The “Torbitt Document,” a photocopied typescript
setting out an alternative history of the last half century, began circulating in conspiracy research circles in the 1970s. Torbitt was a pseudonym of a stillunidentified writer. The lengthy document links
many of the political events of the second half of the
twentieth century into a conspiratorial account of
the Kennedy assassination involving a vast array of
government intelligence agencies.
When Jim Garrison, the New Orleans District
Attorney, began to investigate the assassination of
President Kennedy, he took the position that
regardless of who was behind the assassination,
the American people could take the truth, should
have the facts, and that the right of the American
people to know superseded any damage that
might be done to the image of the United States
by the revelation of respected government
leaders’ involvement in the crime.
Chief Justice Warren and other members of the
Commission charged to investigate the
assassination took another position: that is, to
reveal the assassination scheme would do great
harm and damage to the image of the United
States in the eyes of the world, and therefore, it
would be to the best interests of the Nation that
their findings be as were reported by them.
Enough evidence has now been uncovered by
the Warren Commission, other investigative
828

agencies here and in Europe, and Jim Garrison to
reveal an almost total working knowledge of how
the assassination was carried out and by whom.
The killing of President Kennedy was planned
and supervised by Division Five of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, a relatively small
department within the FBI whose usual duties are
espionage and counter-espionage activities.
Actually, Division Five acted dually with the
Defense Intelligence Agency which was acting on
behalf of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the Pentagon.
Directly under the two-pronged leadership of
Division Five and the DIA was the Control
Group, their highly secret policy agency—the
Defense Industrial Security Command.
The Defense Industrial Security Command has
always been kept secret because it acts, in
addition to its two official control organizations,
on behalf of NASA, the Atomic Energy
Commission, the U.S. Information Agency, and
the arms, equipment, ammunition, munitions and
related miscellaneous supply manufacturing
corporations contracting with NASA, the AEC,
USIA, and the Pentagon. One can readily observe
that DISC is not compatible with an open
Democracy and the U.S. Constitution.
Consequently, the top secret arms manufacturers’
police agency has been kept from the knowledge
of even most U.S. officials and Congressmen.
The Defense Industrial Security Command had
its beginnings when J. Edgar Hoover in the early
1930s organized the police force of the fledgling
Tennessee Valley Authority at the request of
David Lillienthal. The police force covered the
entire TVA from Knoxville, Tennessee through
Huntsville and Florence, Alabama into Kentucky
and back through the eastern portion of
Tennessee into southern Kentucky. This was one
of the first federal agencies with a separate police
force. This force grew and Lillienthal took it
forward to cover the Atomic Energy Commission,
thus tying it into the Army Intelligence Service.
L.M. Bloomfield, a Montreal, CANADA lawyer
bearing the reputation as a sex deviate, the direct
supervisor of all contractual agents with J. Edgar
Hoover’s Division Five, was the top co-ordinator for

Pentagon Papers

the network planning the execution. A Swiss
corporation, Permindex, was used to head five front
organizations responsible for furnishing personnel
and supervisors to carry out assigned duties.
The five groups under Permindex and their
supervisors were:
1. The Czarist Russian, Eastern European and
Middle East exile organization called
SOLIDARISTS, headed by Ferenc Nagy, exHungarian Premier, and John DeMenil, Russian
exile from Houston, Texas, a close friend and
supporter of Lyndon Johnson for over thirty years.
2. A section of the AMERICAN COUNCIL
OF CHRISTIAN CHURCHES headed by H.L.
Hunt of Dallas, Texas.
3. A Cuban exile group called FREE CUBA
COMMITTEE headed by Carlos Prio Socarras,
ex-Cuban President.
4. An organization of United States, Caribbean,
and Havana, Cuba gamblers called the Syndicate
headed by Clifford Jones, ex-Lieutenant Governor
of Nevada and Democratic National
Committeeman, and Bobby Baker of Washington,
D.C. This group worked closely with a Mafia
family headed by Joe Bonnano.
5. The SECURITY DIVISION of the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
headed by Wernher Von Braun, head of the
German Nazi rocket program from 1932 through
1945. Headquarters for this group was the
DEFENSE INDUSTRIAL SECURITY
COMMAND at Muscle Shoals Redstone Arsenal
in Alabama and on East Broad Street in
Columbus, Ohio.
The Defense Industrial Security Command is
the police and espionage agency for the U.S.
munitions makers. DISC was organized by J.
Edgar Hoover; William Sullivan, his chief
assistant, is in direct command. We shall later
examine the involvement of a large number of the
DISC agents including Clay Shaw, Guy Bannister,
David Ferrie, Lee Harvey Oswald, Jack Ruby and
others with Permindex’s Louis Mortimer
Bloomfield of Montreal, Canada in charge.
As it must be, all of the preceding facts are
established and documented by overwhelming

evidence beyond a reasonable doubt on the
following pages. Gordon Novel obtained the aid
of the Columbus office in 1967 when Jim
Garrison was attempting to get him back to
Louisiana from Ohio. Personnel of the Defense
Intelligence Agency were subject to assignment
with the Defense Industrial Security Command.
Source
Torbitt, William. 1997. NASA, Nazis and JFK: The
Torbitt Document. Edited by Kenn Thomas.
Kempton, IL: Adventures Unlimited. Available at
http://www.newsmakingnews.com/torbitt.htm.

Pentagon Papers (1971)
In the following exchanges recorded on his secret
tape recorder in the Oval Office, President Nixon
and his advisors discuss what to do about the leak of
the “Pentagon Papers,” a classified account of the
development of the Vietnam War supplied to the
New York Times by Daniel Ellsberg. Nixon considered that the leak was part of a conspiracy against
his administration, and in order to stop such leaks,
he initiated a group of agents called the “Plumbers.”
As well as breaking and entering the office of Ellsberg’s psychoanalyst, the Plumbers later went on to
carry out the Watergate burglary.
June 15, 1971: Nixon and Kissinger, Oval Office
Nixon: Henry, there’s a conspiracy. You
understand?
Kissinger: I believe it now. I didn’t believe it
formerly, but I believe it now.
Nixon: There is. Whether it’s Gelb or the Rand
Corporation guy, he’s in a conspiracy.
June 17, 1971: Nixon, Haldeman, and Ronald
Ziegler, 2:42–3:33 P.M., Oval Office
Nixon: We can kill these people with this.
“Knowingly publishing stolen goods.” That’s what
the Times is doing. “Knowingly publishing stolen
goods.” “Giving aid and comfort to the enemy.”
That’s the way you have to play it. “Giving aid and
comfort to the enemy.” That’s the way you have to
play it. “No cause justifies breaking the law.”
Haldeman: Rogers is concerned that [ . . .] it’s
interfering with the judicial process.
829

Richard Nixon, “Whole Bay of Pigs Thing”

Nixon: Oh, for Christsakes. [ . . .] A statement
by Rogers is not going to affect the judicial
process. [ . . .] Don’t try to get this past
Ehrlichman and the lawyers—the one on “stolen
goods.” [ . . .] Everything we do around here is
done in such a mamby-pamby jackass way, we
aren’t getting anything across.
[ . . .]
Nixon: [ . . .] an opportunity here now, a real
opportunity. [unclear] They did this for the
purpose of hurting the nat—hurting us of course
and hurting the nation. Now they’re [the New
York Times] going to pay. As far as I’m concerned,
I will make them personally pay as long as I am in
this office.
[ . . .]
Nixon: [ . . .] put some—the fear of God into
other people in this government.
[ . . .]
Nixon: I hope to God—he’s not Jewish is he?
Ziegler: [Laughing] I’m sure he is—Ellsberg?
Nixon: I hope not, I hope not.
Haldeman: [unclear] is Jewish. Why the hell
wouldn’t he be?
Nixon: Oh yeah, I know, I know, I know, but
it’s, it’s, it’s, it’s a bad thing for us. It’s a bad thing
for us. It’s a bad thing. Maybe we’ll be lucky for
once. Many Jews in the Communist conspiracy.
[ . . .] Chambers and Hiss were the only non-Jews.
[ . . .] Many thought that Hiss was. He could have
been a half. [ . . .] Every other one was a Jew—
and it raised hell for us. But in this case, I hope to
God he’s not a Jew.
Haldeman: [Laughing] Well, I suspect he is.
Nixon: You can’t tell by the name.
Haldeman: Or Halperin. [ . . .] Gelb is—
Nixon: Gelb’s a Jew.
June 29, 1971: Nixon and Mitchell, 8:05 A.M.,
Cabinet Room
Nixon: I noticed that Mr. Ellsberg, when he was
picked up, said that he’s not guilty. He thought, “I
did this for patriotic reasons. I did it for the
interests of the country.” Alger Hiss said the same
thing. The Rosenbergs said the same thing. Victor
Perlo . . . same thing. I know about Ellsberg . . .
like Perlo, he could be a fascist, he could be a
830

communist, he could be for the war, he could be
against the war. [ . . .] Some of our people said,
“Don’t make him a martyr.” And after all, he is for
all intentions—after all, everyone is against the war.
Sure they are. What are you going to do? Are you
going to just let everyone in the government just go
to hell—because of that? So we’re going to go
forward on that [prosecution], John.
Sources
Nixon Tapes. College Park: Nixon Library Materials
at NARA.
Transcriptions by National Security Archive,
available at http://www.gwu.edu/%7Ensarchiv/
NSAEBB/NSAEBB48/transcript.pdf and Daniel
Ellsberg, available at http://www.ellsberg.net/
writing/Nixon_Tapes.htm.

Richard Nixon, “Whole
Bay of Pigs Thing” (1972)
This section from President Nixon’s Oval Office
tapes has been regarded as part of the “smoking
gun” of the Watergate scandal. However, conspiracy researchers investigating the Kennedy assassination have also long been intrigued by a comment
made by Nixon to H. R. Haldeman. Conspiracy
theorists believe that when Nixon talks about the
“whole Bay of Pigs thing,” he’s revealing his supposed involvement in the Kennedy assassination.
Transcript of the recording of a meeting
between President Nixon and H. R. Haldeman in
the Oval Office on June 23, 1972 from 10.04 A.M.
to 11.39 A.M.
Haldeman: okay—that’s fine. Now, on the
investigation, you know, the Democratic break-in
thing, we’re back to the—in the, the problem area
because the FBI is not under control, because
Gray doesn’t exactly know how to control them,
and they have, their investigation is now leading
into some productive areas, because they’ve been
able to trace the money, not through the money
itself, but through the bank, you know, sources—
the banker himself. And, and it goes in some
directions we don’t want it to go. Ah, also there
have been some things, like an informant came in

Richard Nixon, “Whole Bay of Pigs Thing”

off the street to the FBI in Miami, who was a
photographer or has a friend who is a photographer
who developed some films through this guy,
Barker, and the films had pictures of Democratic
National Committee letter head documents and
things. So I guess, so it’s things like that that are
gonna, that are filtering in. Mitchell came up with
yesterday, and John Dean analyzed very carefully
last night and concludes, concurs now with
Mitchell’s recommendation that the only way to
solve this, and we’re set up beautifully to do it, ah,
in that and that . . . the only network that paid any
attention to it last night was NBC . . . they did a
massive story on the Cuban [ . . .]
Nixon: Of course, this is a, this is a Hunt, you
will—that will uncover a lot of things. You open
that scab there’s a hell of a lot of things and that
we just feel that it would be very detrimental to
have this thing go any further. This involves these
Cubans, Hunt, and a lot of hanky-panky that we
have nothing to do with ourselves. Well what the
hell, did Mitchell know about this thing to any
much of a degree?
Haldeman: I think so. I don’t think he knew the
details, but I think he knew.
Nixon: He didn’t know how it was going to be
handled though, with Dahlberg and the Texans
and so forth? Well who was the asshole that did?
[Unintelligible] Is it Liddy? Is that the fellow? He
must be a little nuts.
Haldeman: He is.
Nixon: I mean he just isn’t well screwed on is
he? Isn’t that the problem?
Haldeman: No, but he was under pressure,
apparently, to get more information, and as he got
more pressure, he pushed the people harder to
move harder on . . .
Nixon: Pressure from Mitchell?
Haldeman: Apparently.
Nixon: Oh, Mitchell, Mitchell was at the point
that you made on this, that exactly what I need
from you is on the—
Haldeman: Gemstone, yeah.
Nixon: All right, fine, I understand it all. We
won’t second-guess Mitchell and the rest. Thank
God it wasn’t Colson.

Haldeman: The FBI interviewed Colson
yesterday. They determined that would be a good
thing to do.
Nixon: Um hum.
Haldeman: Ah, to have him take a . . .
Nixon: Um hum.
Haldeman: An interrogation, which he did, and
that, the FBI guys working the case had
concluded that there were one or two
possibilities, one, that this was a White House,
they don’t think that there is anything at the
Election Committee, they think it was either a
White House operation and they had some
obscure reasons for it, non political, . . .
Nixon: Uh huh.
Haldeman: Or it was a . . .
Nixon: Cuban thing—
Haldeman: Cubans and the CIA. And after
their interrogation of, of . . .
Nixon: Colson.
Haldeman: Colson, yesterday, they concluded it
was not the White House, but are now convinced
it is a CIA thing, so the CIA turn off would [ . . .]
Nixon: When you get in these people when
you . . . get these people in, say: “Look, the
problem is that this will open the whole, the whole
Bay of Pigs thing, and the President just feels that”
ah, without going into the details . . . don’t, don’t lie
to them to the extent to say there is no
involvement, but just say this is sort of a comedy of
errors, bizarre, without getting into it, “the
President believes that it is going to open the whole
Bay of Pigs thing up again. And, ah because these
people are plugging for, for keeps and that they
should call the FBI in and say that we wish for the
country, don’t go any further into this case,” period!
Haldeman: OK.
Nixon: That’s the way to put it, do it straight.
[Unintelligible]
Haldeman: Get more done for our cause by the
opposition than by us at this point.
Nixon: You think so?
Haldeman: I think so, yeah.
Source
Available at http://www.watergate.info/tapes/72-0623_smoking-gun.shtml.

831

Richard E. Sprague, The Taking of America, 1-2-3

Richard E. Sprague, The Taking of
America, 1-2-3 (1976)
Richard Sprague, a computer expert who became
increasingly involved in investigating the Kennedy
assassination, provided photographic analysis for
Jim Garrison’s case against Clay Shaw before going
on to found the Committee to Investigate Assassinations in 1968. He worked to persuade Congress to
conduct an inquiry into the murders of JFK, RFK,
and Martin Luther King, Jr., and the attempted
assassination of presidential candidate George Wallace, and subsequently served as a consultant to the
appointed House Select Committee on Assassinations. This selection is from his 1976 book The Taking of America.
The taking of America has been both a simple
and a very complex process. It has not been the
result of a coup d’etat, although some aspects of
the process resemble a coup. It has not been a
process similar to the dictatorship takeovers in
Germany, Italy and other fascist regimes. It has
not been a process like the Communist
“uprisings” in Russia, Hungary and other Eastern
European countries.
The taking of America has been a process
unique in the history of the world. The one
feature that makes it unique is that what was once
the greatest democracy in the world has been
taken over by a power control group without the
knowledge of most of the American people, their
congressional representatives, or the rest of the
world.
The group has taken America in this fashion
because manipulation of the American presidency
and the presidential electoral procedure is enough
to control America. Two fiendishly clever
stratagems were used to keep the fact that control
had been seized from being obvious to the
people. The first of these was control of the
established media in the dissemination of both
true (blocking) and false (flooding) information.
The second was the use of clandestine and secret
weapons and techniques developed during World
War Two and perfected during the Korean and
Viet Nam wars. These techniques are so new and
832

unusual as to be unbelievable to most citizens.
Thus, the incredibility of such weapons as
hypnosis, brainwashing and “programming” of
patsies as assassins became a psychological tool in
the bag of techniques of the power control group.
The average American has shrugged off the
possibility of the takeover with the belief that,
“That’s not possible here.”
The use of such weapons, coupled with a
tremendous campaign through the controlled
media that both whitewashes any signs of
conspiracies and spreads disinformation
throughout the country, has successfully blocked
any serious or official attempts to get at the truth.
Unofficial investigators, private researchers, and
even Congressional representatives have been
ridiculed and completely blocked by both the
power control group and their media allies.
To take over a real democracy without letting
the people know it has been taken over is a
fantastic achievement. A list of the
accomplishments of the power control group
illustrates the point. Since 1963, they have:
1. Assassinated John F. Kennedy;
2. Controlled Lyndon B. Johnson as president;
3. Forced LBJ out of the presidency;
4. Assassinated Robert F. Kennedy, assuring
Nixon’s election in 1968;
5. Assassinated Dr. Martin Luther King;
6. Eliminated Ted Kennedy as a contender in
the 1972 elections by framing him at
Chappaquiddick and threatening his children;
7. Stopped George Wallace’s campaign,
assuring Nixon’s election in 1972;
8. Knocked Edmund Muskie out of the 1972
election campaign by using dirty tricks;
9. Covered up all of the above;
10. Controlled the 15 major news media
organizations;
11. Made Gerald Ford vice president and then
president;
12. Insured continuity of the cover-ups by
forcing Ford to pardon Nixon;
13. Murdered about 100 witnesses and
participants in the three assassinations and one
attempted assassination;

Richard E. Sprague, The Taking of America, 1-2-3

14. Blocked efforts by private citizens and
organizations to reveal the take-over; discredited,
ruined or infiltrated these individuals or groups;
murdered or were accomplices to the murders of
the operating assassins;
15. Blocked efforts by members of the Senate
and House to initiate investigations of the
assassinations and attempted to whitewash,
ridicule or eliminate these efforts (their influence
and infiltration has been particularly effective in
the Church Committee and in the House Rules
Committee);
16. Controlled the presidential election
procedure since 1964 by eliminating the
candidates who might expose the truth and
insuring the election or appointment of
candidates already committed to covering up the
truth about the take-over.
The question for 1976 was: Could the power
control group continue the take-over during that
year’s elections? Would they be successful in
blocking efforts to expose the take-over by
congress? Would they be able to fool the American
public again, control the media, and eliminate the
contenders for the presidency in 1976 who might
have threatened their secure position? The answer
to these questions was “Yes.”
The candidates on the scene during the 1976
primaries fell into three categories according to
the control group’s point of view. Category 1
included candidates that would continue the
cover-up of the take-over. Gerald Ford led this
group with Ronald Reagan not far behind him.
Henry Jackson was a probable ally because of his
backing of the CIA, an important organization in
the cover-ups and the takeover. Category 2
included those candidates who would probably try
to expose the take-over and the power control
group if elected. Morris Udall, Fred Harris and
George Wallace fell into this category. The third
category included candidates whose intentions
were not clear, or unknown at the time. Jimmy
Carter, Franck Church and Hubert Humphrey
remained in this group, and Sergeant Shriver and
Birch Bayh were also in this category before they
dropped out of the race.

Efforts would have been made to eliminate
Udall, Harris or Wallace if any one of them was
nominated at the Democratic convention. Carter
must certainly have been put to some kind of
loyalty test before being permitted to continue as
the Democratic nominee. Reagan and Ford were,
no doubt, already “safe” candidates for the control
group because of their demonstrated cover-up
performances.
Ford had cooperated fully in at least four ways.
He was on the Warren Commission and played a
leading role in the cover-up. He wrote the coverup book Portrait of the Assassin. He pardoned
Nixon and protected the Nixon tapes. And he
formed the Rockefeller Commission, appointing
David Belin as head of the staff to continue the
cover-up of the JFK conspiracy.
Reagan had cooperated in at least three ways.
He protected important witnesses from
extradition from California between 1967 and
1969 for testimony before the grand jury in New
Orleans and at the trial of Clay Shaw. He assisted
Evelle Younger, then district attorney in Los
Angeles and later California state attorney
general, in covering up the assassination
conspiracy in the Robert Kennedy case. And he
has consistently supported the foreign and
domestic clandestine activities of the CIA, FBI
and other intelligence agencies both nationally
and in California.
A later chapter will describe just how the
Democratic candidate may be eliminated and
when. Congressman Henry B. Gonzalez from San
Antonio, Texas, who introduced House Resolution
204 to reopen the two Kennedy assassination cases,
the Dr. King case and the George Wallace
shooting, took a public position on the possibility
that the 1976 election was controlled. Gonzalez
said “If we find the answers—the truth—to the
questions I have raised (about the assassinations of
JFK, RFK, MLK and the Wallace attempt), as well
as those many others have raised, will the truth
make us free? Yes, it will, for the truth will make us
free to pursue democracy—our system of
government—through the ballot box, and we will
not be subject to government by bullets. The truth
833

Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Hearing on MKULTRA

will enable us to prevent such a series of events
from happening again. Some of the supporters of
the investigation have written to me recently of
their hope that the investigation will get underway
right away (March 1976) because they are
concerned that there is great danger in store for
the Democratic nominee for the President,
whoever he turns out to be. I hope very much that
these fears do not turn out to have a basis in fact.”
Source
Sprague, Richard E. [1976] 1985. The Taking of
America, 1-2-3. Published by author. Available at
http://www.ratical.org/ratville/JFK/ToA/ToAchp1.
html.

Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
Hearing on MKULTRA (1977)
Part of the congressional investigations of the 1970s
into the activities of the intelligence agencies looked
at MKULTRA, a program to develop mind control
techniques that had included the use of nonvoluntary LSD testing. In this exchange, Admiral Turner,
then director of the CIA, is quizzed about the LSDrelated death of Frank Olson, and also about the
agency’s running a safe house seemingly as a
brothel.
Testimony of Admiral Stansfield Turner,
Director of Central Intelligence
Accompanied by Frank Laubinger, Office of
Technical Services; Al Brody, Office of Inspector
General; Ernest Mayerfield, Office of General
Counsel; and George L. Cary, Legislative Counsel
SENATOR KENNEDY: Admiral Turner, this is
an enormously distressing report that you give to
the American Congress and to the American
people today. Granted, it happened many years
ago, but what we are basically talking about is an
activity which took place in the country that
involved the perversion and corruption of many of
our outstanding research centers in this country,
with CIA funds, where some of our top
researchers were unwittingly involved in research

834

sponsored by the Agency in which they had no
knowledge of the background or the support for.
Much of it was done with American citizens
who were completely unknowing in terms of
taking various drugs, and there are perhaps any
number of Americans who are walking around
today on the east coast or west coast who were
given drugs, with all the kinds of physical and
psychological damage that can be caused. We
have gone over that in very careful detail, and it is
significant and severe indeed.
I do not know what could be done in a less
democratic country that would be more alien to
our own traditions than was really done in this
narrow area, and as you give this report to the
Committee, I would like to get some sense of
your own concern about this type of activity, and
how you react, having assumed this important
responsibility with the confidence of President
Carter and the overwhelming support, obviously,
of the Congress, under this set of circumstances.
I did not get much of a feeling in reviewing
your statement here this morning of the kind of
abhorrence to this type of past activity which I
think the American people would certainly
deplore and which I believe that you do, but
could you comment upon that question, and also
perhaps give us what ideas you have to ensure
that it cannot happen again?
ADMIRAL TURNER: Senator Kennedy, it is
totally abhorrent for me to think of using a human
being as a guinea pig and in any way jeopardizing
his life and his health, no matter how great the
cause. I am not here to pass judgment on my
predecessors, but I can assure you that this is
totally beyond the pale of my contemplation of
activities that the CIA or any other of our
intelligence agencies should undertake.
[ . . .]
SENATOR SCHWEIKER: Admiral Turner, I
read in The New York Times that part of this
series of MKULTRA experiments involved an
arrangement with the Federal Bureau of
Narcotics to test LSD surreptitiously on unwitting
patrons in bars in New York and San Francisco.

Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Hearing on MKULTRA

Some of the subjects became violently ill and
were hospitalized. I wonder if you would just
briefly describe what we were doing there and
how it was carried out? I assume it was through a
safe house operation. I don’t believe your
statement went into much detail.
ADMIRAL TURNER: I did mention the safe
house operation in my statement, sir, and that is
how these were carried out. What we have
learned from the new documentation is the
location and the dates at which the safe houses
were run by the CIA and the identification of
three individuals who were associated with
running those safe houses. We know something
about the construction work that was done in
them because there were contracts for this.
Beyond that, we are pretty much drawing
inferences as to the things that went on as to what
you are saying here.
SENATOR SCHWEIKER: Well, the subjects
were unwitting. You can infer that much, right?
ADMIRAL TURNER: Right.
SENATOR SCHWEIKER: If you happened to
be at the wrong bar at the wrong place and time,
you got it.
ADMIRAL TURNER: We are trying to be very
precise with you, sir, and not draw an inference
here. There are six cases of these one hundred
and forty-nine where we have enough evidence in
this new documentation to substantiate that there
was unwitting testing and some of that involves
these safe houses. There are other cases where it
is ambiguous as to whether the testing was
unwitting or voluntary. There are others where it
was clearly voluntary.
SENATOR SCHWEIKER: Of course, after a
few drinks, it is questionable whether informed
consent means anything to a person in a bar
anyway.
ADMIRAL TURNER: Well, we don’t have any
indication that all these cases where it is
ambiguous involved drinking of any kind. There
are cases in penal institutions where it is not clear
whether the prisoner was given a choice or not. I
don’t know that he wasn’t given a choice, but I

don’t positively know that he was, and I classify
that as an ambiguous incident.
[ . . .]
SENATOR INOUYE: Admiral Turner,
MKULTRA Subproject 3 was a project involving
the surreptitious administration of LSD on
unwitting persons, was it not?
ADMIRAL TURNER: Yes, sir.
SENATOR INOUYE: In February, 1954, and
this was in the very early stages of MKULTRA,
the Director of Central Intelligence wrote to the
technical services staff officials criticizing their
judgment because they had participated in an
experiment involving the administration of LSD
on an unwitting basis to Dr. Frank Olson, who
later committed suicide. Now, the individuals
criticized were the same individuals who were
responsible for Subproject 3, involving exactly the
same practices. Even though these individuals
were clearly aware of the dangers of surreptitious
administration and had been criticized by the
Director of Central Intelligence, Subproject 3 was
not terminated immediately after Dr. Olson’s
death. In fact, according to the documents, it
continued for a number of years. Can you provide
this committee with any explanation of how such
testing could have continued under these
circumstances?
ADMIRAL TURNER: No, sir, I really can’t.
[ . . .]
SENATOR KENNEDY: With regards to the
activities that took place in these safe houses, as I
understand from the records, two-way mirrors
were used. Is that your understanding?
ADMIRAL TURNER: Yes, sir. We have
records that construction was done to put in twoway mirrors.
SENATOR KENNEDY: And they were placed
in the bedroom, as I understand.
(pause)
SENATOR KENNEDY: Well, we have
documents—
ADMIRAL TURNER: I believe that was in the
[Church Senate Committee] record, but I don’t
have the details.

835

Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations

SENATOR KENNEDY: And rather elaborate
decorations were added, as I understand, at least
to the one in San Francisco, in the bedroom,
which are French can-can dancers, floral pictures,
drapery, including installation of bedroom
mirrors, three-framed Toulouse Lautrec posters
with black silk mats, and a number of other—red
bedroom curtains and recording equipment, and
then a series of documents which were provided
to the committee which indicate a wide
proliferation of different cash for $100, generally
in the $100 range over a period of time on the
particular checks. Even the names are blocked
out, as to the person who is receiving it. Cash for
undercover agents, operating expenses, drinks,
entertainment while administering, and then it is
dashed out, and then the other documents, that
would suggest, at least with the signature of your
principal agent out there, that called the
operation “Midnight Climax.”
What can you tell us what it might suggest to
you about what techniques were being used by
the Agency in terms of reaching that sort of
broad-based group of Americans that were being
evidently enticed for testing in terms of drugs and
others? Do you draw any kind of conclusion about
what might have been going on out there, in these
safe houses?
ADMIRAL TURNER: No, sir.
(general laughter)
Source
U.S. Senate. 1977. Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence Hearing on MKULTRA. 3 August.

Report of the Select Committee
on Assassinations (1979)
Although it concurred with most of the findings of
the Warren Commission, the House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded in its report in
1979 that there was “a high probability” (based on
acoustic evidence that has since been challenged)
that there was more than one gunman involved in
the shooting of President Kennedy, and hence some
form of a conspiracy.

836

A. Lee Harvey Oswald fired three shots at
President John F. Kennedy. The second and third
shots he fired struck the President. The third shot
he fired killed the President.
1. President Kennedy was struck by two rifle
shots fired from behind him.
2. The shots that struck President Kennedy
from behind him were fired from the sixth floor
window of the southeast corner of the Texas
School Book Depository building.
3. Lee Harvey Oswald owned the rifle that was
used to fire the shots from the sixth floor window
of the southeast corner of the Texas School Book
Depository building.
4. Lee Harvey Oswald, shortly before the
assassination, had access to and was present on
the sixth floor of the Texas School Book
Depository building.
5. Lee Harvey Oswald’s other actions tend to
support the conclusion that he assassinated
President Kennedy.
B. Scientific acoustical evidence establishes a
high probability that two gunmen fired at President
John F. Kennedy. Other scientific evidence does
not preclude the possibility of two gunmen firing at
the President. Scientific evidence negates some
specific conspiracy allegations.
C. The committee believes, on the basis of the
evidence available to it, that President John F.
Kennedy was probably assassinated as a result of a
conspiracy. The committee is unable to identify
the other gunman or the extent of the conspiracy.
1. The committee believes, on the basis of the
evidence available to it, that the Soviet
Government was not involved in the assassination
of President Kennedy.
2. The committee believes, on the basis of the
evidence available to it, that the Cuban
Government was not involved in the assassination
of President Kennedy.
3. The committee believes, on the basis of the
evidence available to it, that anti-Castro Cuban
groups, as groups, were not involved in the
assassination of President Kennedy, but that the
available evidence does not preclude the

Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations

possibility that individual members may have
been involved.
4. The committee believes, on the basis of the
evidence available to it, that the national syndicate
of organized crime, as a group, was not involved
in the assassination of President Kennedy, but
that the available evidence does not preclude the
possibility that individual members may have
been involved.
5. The Secret Service, Federal Bureau of
Investigation and Central Intelligence Agency
were not involved in the assassination of President
Kennedy.
D. Agencies and departments of the U.S.
Government performed with varying degrees of
competency in the fulfillment of their duties.
President John F. Kennedy did not receive
adequate protection. A thorough and reliable
investigation into the responsibility of Lee Harvey
Oswald for the assassination of President John F.
Kennedy was conducted. The investigation into
the possibility of conspiracy in the assassination
was inadequate. The conclusions of the
investigations were arrived at in good faith, but
presented in a fashion that was too definitive.
1. The Secret Service was deficient in the
performance of its duties.
a. The Secret Service possessed information
that was not properly analyzed, investigated or
used by the Secret Service in connection with the
President’s trip to Dallas; in addition, Secret
Service agents in the motorcade were
inadequately prepared to protect the President
from a sniper.
b. The responsibility of the Secret Service to
investigate the assassination was terminated when
the Federal Bureau of Investigation assumed
primary investigative responsibility.
2. The Department of Justice failed to exercise
initiative in supervising and directing the
investigation by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation of the assassination.
3. The Federal Bureau of Investigation
performed with varying degrees of competency in
the fulfillment of its duties.

a. The Federal Bureau of Investigation
adequately investigated Lee Harvey Oswald prior
to the assassination and properly evaluated the
evidence it possessed to assess his potential to
endanger the public safety in a national
emergency.
b. The Federal Bureau of Investigation
conducted a thorough and professional
investigation into the responsibility of Lee Harvey
Oswald for the assassination.
c. The Federal Bureau of Investigation failed to
investigate adequately the possibility of a
conspiracy to assassinate the President.
d. The Federal Bureau of Investigation was
deficient in its sharing of information with other
agencies and departments.
4. The Central Intelligence Agency was
deficient in its collection and sharing of
information both prior to and subsequent to the
assassination.
5. The Warren Commission performed with
varying degrees of competency in the fulfillment
of its duties.
a. The Warren Commission conducted a
thorough and professional investigation into the
responsibility of Lee Harvey Oswald for the
assassination.
b. The Warren Commission failed to investigate
adequately the possibility of a conspiracy to
assassinate the President. This deficiency was
attributable in part to the failure of the
Commission to receive all the relevant
information that was in the possession of other
agencies and departments of the Government.
c. The Warren Commission arrived at its
conclusions, based on the evidence available to it,
in good faith.
d. The Warren Commission presented the
conclusions in its report in a fashion that was too
definitive.
Source
Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations of
the U.S. House of Representatives. 1979.
Washington, DC: United States Government
Printing Office. Available at http://www.archives.

837

Pat Robertson, “Are Credit Cards Associated with the Mark of the Beast?”

gov/research_room/jfk/house_select_committee/
committee_report.html.

Pat Robertson, “Are Credit Cards Associated
with the Mark of the Beast?” (1985)
In this section from his 1985 book Inspirational
Writings of Pat Robertson: The Secret Kingdom &
Answers to 200 of Life’s Most Probing Questions,
the evangelist and writer Pat Robertson echoes
other right-wing commentators who voice concerns
that the apocalyptic prophecy that people will be
branded with the Satanic “mark of the beast” is
taking shape in the form of credit card data.
In the book of Revelation, there is a discussion
of an individual who will become a world dictator,
ruler of a domain that looks very similar to the old
Roman Empire. This individual is called the
“living creature,” or the “beast.” The Bible tells us
he has a number: 666 (see Revelation 13:11–8).
Six is the biblical number of humanity. It is one
less than perfection. The man whose number is
666 will lead humanity’s revolt against God. There
are some who feel that Nero could have been that
man whose number is 666, and various other
names have also been put forward as that person.
But Revelation says that, when he comes onto the
scene, he will have such dominance that no one
can buy or sell without taking his mark, either on
the forehead—which indicates will—or on the
hand—which indicates action. So, how will that
mark come to be accepted? There are a couple of
possibilities. Today we have developed devices
called smart cards. These are tiny credit cards that
have a microchip implanted in them. They can be
put through a card reader at a store that will
reveal a person’s entire credit history, including
the amount of his bank account. The person’s
transaction in the store can be sent back to a
central bank and one master account can then be
kept in a computer.
Now there is also the SWIFT system, which
means Society of World-wide Interfunds
Transfers, headquartered in Brussels, Belgium. It
ties together about seven hundred major banking
838

systems around the world. Every day, hundreds of
billions of dollars in bank transactions are
processed by this vast world-wide computer
network. Clearly, mankind now has the
technology to link up virtually all the credit in the
entire civilized world from the local retail outlet
right through to the international banking center.
So, it would not be too difficult, technologically,
to move from the smart card to a microchip
implanted in the hand. This could be read by a
laser-type device that would in turn be connected
to a master computer. This could lead to a time
when there would be no need for cash or checks:
Everything would be done by computer. With
these developments, it becomes easy to see how
the world may be controlled.
Banks are moving in the direction of ever more
efficiency with the advent of so-called “transaction
cards.” These are not charge cards, but they debit
an account immediately. As a charge is made, they
immediately subtract the money from the bank
account. This entire electronic funds transfer
system is gaining momentum in the drive toward
a checkless, cashless society. This society will not
necessarily occur, but it certainly is technologically
possible, and could easily fulfill what Revelation
says: That people could not buy or sell without
the mark of the Beast. [ . . .]
Source
Pat Robertson. 1985. Inspirational Writings of Pat
Robertson: The Secret Kingdom & Answers to 200
of Life’s Most Probing Questions. Nashville:
Thomas Nelson. Available online at: http://www.
cbnindia.org/200Questions/article.php?topic=
12#103. © Pat Roberton. All rights reserved.

Edward J. Markey, “American
Nuclear Guinea Pigs” (1986)
In this letter to the secretary of energy, the chair of
the House Subcommittee on Energy Conservation
and Power summarizes a report on human radiation experiments. Revelations about this program of
testing have become one of the central planks in the
countercultural distrust of government.

Edward J. Markey, “American Nuclear Guinea Pigs”

October 24, 1986
Dear Secretary Herrington:
As you know, the Subcommittee on Energy
Conservation and Power has been conducting an
investigation into radiation experimentation for
human subjects. I am forwarding to you the
results of that investigation, a Subcommittee staff
report titled, “American Nuclear Guinea Pigs:
Three Decades of Radiation Experiments on U.S.
Citizens.”
This report reviewed Department of Energy
documents, which revealed the frequent and
systematic use of human subjects as guinea pigs
for radiation experiments sponsored by the
Department’s predecessor agencies. Some of
these experiments were conducted in the 1940s
and 1950s, and others were performed during
the supposedly more enlightened 1960s and
1970s. The report describes in detail 31
experiments during which about 695 persons
were exposed.
In many of these experiments, individuals were
exposed to radiation which provided little or no
medical benefit to the subjects. The purpose of
several of these experiments was actually to cause
injury to the participants. Many others sought
simply to measure the effects of radiation on
humans. American citizens thus became nuclear
calibration devices for experimenters run amok.
In a number of experiments, subjects received
doses that exceeded presently recognized limits
for occupational radiation exposure. Doses were
as much as 98 times the body burden recognized
at the time the experiments were conducted.
Too many of these experiments used human
subjects that were captive audiences or
populations that some experimenters perhaps
might have considered “expendable”: the elderly,
prisoners, hospital patients suffering from
terminal diseases or who might not have retained
their full faculties for informed consent.
Some of the more repugnant or bizarre of these
experiments include the following:
—From 1945 to 1947, as part of the Manhattan
Project, 18 patients believed to have limited life
spans were injected with plutonium.

—From 1961 to 1965, at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 20 elderly subjects were
injected or fed radium or thorium.
—During 1946 and 1947, at the University of
Rochester, six patients with good kidney function
were injected with uranium salts to determine the
concentration which could produce renal injury.
—From 1953 to 1957, at Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, approximately 12
terminal brain tumor patients were injected with
uranium to determine the dose at which kidney
damage began to occur.
—From 1963 to 1971, 67 inmates at Oregon
State Prison and 64 inmates at Washington State
Prison received x-rays to their testes to determine
the effects of radiation on human fertility and
testicular function.
—From 1963 to 1965, at the Atomic Energy
Commission’s National Reactor Testing Station in
Idaho, radioactive iodine was purposely released
on seven separate occasions. In one experiment,
seven human subjects drank milk from cows
which had grazed on iodine-contaminated land.
—From 1961 to 1963, at the University of
Chicago and Argonne National Laboratory, 102
human subjects were fed real fallout from the
Nevada Test Site; simulated fallout particles
containing radioactive material; or solutions of
radioactive cesium and strontium.
—During the late 1960s, at Columbia
University and Montefiore Hospital, the Bronx, 12
terminal cancer patients were injected with
radioactive calcium and strontium.
These experiments, and others described in the
Subcommittee staff report, shock the conscience
and represent a black mark on the history of
nuclear medical research. They raise one major
horrifying question: did the intense desire to
know the consequences of radioactive exposure
after the dawn of the atomic age lead American
scientists to mimic the kind of demented human
experiments conducted by the Nazis? Did the
Department or its predecessor agencies fund or
sponsor programs which crossed the line that no
scientific research can ever be permitted to
traverse?
839

Webster G. Tarpley and Anton Chaitkin, George Bush: The Unauthorized Biography

While it is clear that present public and
scientific officials are generally not responsible for
these experiments, these circumstances
nonetheless represent a historical, institutional
failure. To compound the evil, in too many
experiments, no long term follow up was
conducted of subjects. While these experiments
cannot be undone, though they must never be
repeated, there are potential remedial steps that
can be taken to help the victims who served as
human nuclear guinea pigs.
I therefore urge the Department of Energy to
make every practicable effort to identify the
persons who served as experimental subjects, to
examine the long term histories of subjects for an
increased incidence of radiation-associated
diseases, and to compensate these unfortunate
victims for suspected damages. A Defense
Department program provides a model for such
follow up. The Nuclear Test Personnel Review,
administered by the Defense Nuclear Agency, is a
registry for military personnel exposed to fallout
from atmospheric nuclear tests. The primary
objectives of the Review are to identify the
approximately 200,000 Defense Department
personnel involved in such tests, to determine
their exposures, to identify incidences of death or
illness, and to assist veterans in claims for
compensation.
If such an effort can be carried out for military
personnel acting in the line of duty, surely a
similar effort should be possible for the far
smaller number of peaceful atomic soldiers used
as unwitting human subjects in radiation
experiments. If you feel that new legislation
would be necessary, the Subcommittee will be
pleased to work with the Department to develop
it. [ . . .]
Sincerely,
Edward J. Markey
Chairman
Source
Available at http://www.GrandConspiracy.
com/transcript-radiation.html. Original document
can be found at http://hrex.dis.anl.gov.

840

Webster G. Tarpley and Anton Chaitkin,
George Bush: The Unauthorized Biography
(1990)
Lyndon Larouche and his followers have been
opponents of George Bush Sr. since the 1980 election when they and other far-right groups branded
him an establishment insider. In George Bush: The
Unauthorized Biography, two members of the
Larouche group offer a lengthy account of the former president’s supposed misdeeds. In the following chapter, the strange circumstances surrounding
the assassination attempt on Ronald Reagan are
outlined, including the fascinating connection
between the Bush and Hinckley families.
The Attempted Coup D’Etat of March 30, 1981
In the midst of the Bush-Baker cabal’s
relentless drive to seize control over the Reagan
administration, John Warnock Hinckley Jr. carried
out his attempt to assassinate President Reagan
on the afternoon of March 30, 1981. George Bush
was visiting Texas that day. Bush was flying from
Fort Worth to Austin in his Air Force Two Boeing
707. In Fort Worth, Bush had unveiled a plaque
at the Hyatt Regency Hotel, the old Hotel Texas,
designating it as a national historic site. This was
the hotel, coincidentally, in which John F.
Kennedy had spent the last night of his life,
before going on to Dallas the next day, November
22, 1963. Here was a sinister symbolism! [ . . .]
Bush says that his flight from Carswell to
Andrews Air Force Base near Washington took
about two and one half hours, and that he arrived
at Andrews at abouit 6:40 PM. Bush says he was
told by Ed Meese that the operation to remove the
bullet that had struck Reagan was a success, and
that the president was likely to survive. Bush’s
customary procedure was to land at Andrews and
then take a helicopter to the vice presidential
residence, the Naval Observatory on Massachusetts
Avenue. His aides Ed Pollard and John Matheny
suggested that he would save time by going by
helicopter directly to the White House south lawn,
where he could arrive in time to be shown on the 7
PM Eastern time evening news broadcasts. Bush

Webster G. Tarpley and Anton Chaitkin, George Bush: The Unauthorized Biography

makes much of the fact that he refused to do this,
allegeedly on the symbolic grounds that “Only the
President lands on the south lawn.”
Back at the White House, the principal cabinet
officers had assembled in the situation room and
had been running a crisis management committee
during the afternoon. Haig says he was at first
adamant that a conspiracy, if discovered, should
be ruthlessly exposed: “It was essential that we get
the facts and publish them quickly. Rumor must
not be allowed to breed on this tragedy.”
Remembering the aftermath of the Kennedy
assassination, I said to Woody Goldberg, “No
matter what the truth is about this shooting, the
American people must know it.” But the truth has
never been established.
Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger’s
memoir of that afternoon reminds us of two
highly relevant facts. The first is that a “NORAD
[North American Air Defense Command]
exercise with a simulated incoming missle attack
had been planned for the next day.” Weinberger
agreed with General David Jones, the chiarman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, that this exercise should
be cancelled.
Weinberger also recalls that the group in the
Situation Room was informed by James Baker
that “there had been a FEMA [Federal
Emergency Management Administration] exercise
scheduled for the next day on presidential
succession, with the general title ‘Nine Lives.’ By
an immediate consensus, it was agreed that
exercise should also be cancelled.”
As Weinberger further recalls, “at almost
exactly 7:00, the Vice President came to the
Situation Room and very calmly assumed the
chair at the head of the table.” According to
Weinberger, the first item discussed was the need
for someonme to sign the Dairy Price Support
Bill the next day so as to reassure the public. Bush
asked Weinberger for a report on the status of US
forces, which Weinberger furnished. [ . . .]
As Weinberger recounts: “[Attorney General
Bill French Smith] then reported that all FBI
reports concurred with the information I had

received; that the shooting was a completely
isolated incident and that the assassin, John
Hinckley, with a previous record in Nashville,
seemed to be a ‘Bremmer’ type, a reference to
the attempted assassin of George Wallace.”
Those who were not watching carefully here
may have missed the fact that just a few minutes
after George Bush had walked into the room, he
had presided over the sweeping under the rug of
the decisive question regarding Hinckley and his
actions: was Hinckley a part of a conspiracy,
domestic or international? Not more than five
hours after the attempt to kill Reagan, on the
basis of the most fragmentary early reports,
before Hinckley had been properly questioned,
and before a full investigation had been carried
out, a group of cabinet officers chaired by George
Bush had ruled out a priori any conspiracy. Haig,
whose memoirs talk most about the possibility of
a conspiracy, does not seem to have objected to
this incredible decision.
From that moment on, “no conspiracy” became
the official doctrine of the US regime, for the
moment a Bush regime, and the most massive
efforts were undertaken to stifle any suggestion to
the contrary. The iron curtain came down on the
truth about Hinckley.
What was the truth of the matter? The Roman
common sense of Lucius Annaeus Seneca [ . . .]
would have dictated that the person who would
have profited most from Reagan’s death be
scrutinized as the prime suspect. That was
obviously Bush, since Bush would have assumed
the presidency if Reagan had succumbed to his
wounds. The same idea was summed up by an
eighth grade student at the Alice Deal Junior
High School in Washington DC who told teachers
on March 31: “It is a plot by Vice President Bush
to get into power. If Bush becomes President, the
CIA would be in charge of the country.” The
pupils at this school had been asked for their
views of the Hinckley assassination attempt of the
previous day.
Curiously enough, press accounts emerging
over the next few days provided a compelling

841

“J.F.K. Assassination, 11/22/63: Coincidence or Conspiracy?”

prima facie case that there had been a conspiracy
around the Hinckley attentat, and that the
conspiracy had included members of Bush’s
immediate family. Most of the overt facts were
not disputed, but were actually confirmed by
Bush and his son Neil.
Source
Tarpley, Webster G., and Anton Chaitkin. 1990.
George Bush: The Unauthorized Biography. Ch.
17. Available at http://www.tarpley.net/bush17.
htm.

“J.F.K. Assassination, 11/22/63:
Coincidence or Conspiracy?” (1990s)
This article by an unnamed writer lists 100 unanswered questions about the Kennedy assassination
that conspiracy researchers have focused on over the
last four decades.
1) Why were over 58 eye-witnesses to the
assassination ignored by the Warren Commission
when they said they felt shots had NOT come
from the Book Depository?
2) Why did most persons in Dealey Plaza run
up the Grassy Knoll after the shots while the
authorities ran to the Book Depository?
3) Why were MULTIPLE rifles found at the
Book Depository and then all but one made to
‘disappear’?
4) Why were ongoing de-escalation plans for
Vietnam reversed within 48 hrs of the
assassination?
5) Why were the ten persons taken into custody
in Dealey Plaza all released, some without so
much as their names taken? What is the evidence
(officially ignored) that some of them were
directly involved?
6) How was ‘Watergate’ and the ensuing
Watergate scandal DIRECTLY connected to the
JFK assassination?
7) What MULTIPLE lines of evidence connect
the JFK, RFK and MLK assassinations?
8) What are the known (often frightening and
bizarre) details of the over 200 persons who were
murdered or died VERY suspiciously (and
842

conveniently) after 11/22/63 because they had
seen the ‘wrong’ things, tried to speak up, etc.?
Why did they die in “clusters” when investigations
were ongoing—sometimes just hours before they
were to be questioned?
9) Why was Nixon one of the few Americans
who could not correctly remember where he was
when the assassination occurred? Why may he
have ‘forgotten’ he was on a plane out of Dallas?
10) Why could J.E. Hoover also not ‘remember’
he was in Dallas for a meeting just days before
the assassination? Why did he show NO surprise
at the announcement of JFK’s death?
11) What is the evidence that FBI informants
(perhaps even Lee Harvey Oswald himself) had
warned the FBI of an impending assassination
attempt on JFK which the FBI ignored and later
denied even getting?
12) What multiple lines of evidence show Ruby
and Oswald’s FBI and CIA connections?
13) What documents are still being withheld
from public scrutiny in the National Archives and
WHY? Why ‘hide’ any when the government
‘believes’ the act was committed by a ‘lone nut’!?
14) Why did so MANY government documents
involving Lee Harvey Oswald and others
‘disappear’ or were said to have been
‘destroyed’—including Lee Harvey Oswald’s Army
Intelligence files, Lee Harvey Oswald’s letter to
his FBI contact Hosty and MUCH MORE?
15) Why when Lee Harvey Oswald returned to
the USA from the USSR was he NOT officially
met by any representatives of the CIA, FBI, State
Dept. etc., but WAS met by Spas T Raiken, a
former Nazi collaborator with intelligence
community connections who the Warren
Commission claimed was with ‘Traveller’s Aid’.
16) Why was Marina Oswald sequestered in a
hotel, surrounded with intelligence community
connected persons, coached as to what to say and
what she had experienced, and threatened with
deportation if she did not cooperate?
17) What evidence connects EVERY president
since the assassination (with the lone exception of
Carter) directly with the assassination or its coverup!? What are George H.W. Bush’s connections to

“J.F.K. Assassination, 11/22/63: Coincidence or Conspiracy?”

the events of 11/22/63? Why was his name and
address in Lee Harvey Oswald’s Dallas friend’s
address book?
18) Why did Jack Ruby repeatedly implore of
the Warren Commissioners to take him out of
Dallas and to Washington where he felt he could
speak the truth? Why did they NOT take him up
on his offer and pleas?
19) What did Jack Ruby mean when he said
that he was “no more involved in a conspiracy
than you gentlemen” when he spoke to the
Warren Commission?
20) Why did Ruby suddenly contract cancer
and die just before his new trial was to begin?
21) Why did Dorothy Kilgallan, the only
reporter to interview Ruby in prison, die
mysteriously days after she said she would “break
the case wide open” and her best friend die some
days thereafter?
22) How do the events of 11/22/63 and its
immediate aftermath STILL affect our everyday
political and even personal lives?
23) What Government agencies and other
groups were involved in the planning and
execution of the President and then cover it up?
24) Why was the single-bullet or “Magic Bullet”
theory of the Warren Commission a physical and
medical IMPOSSIBILITY?
25) Why do those who played prominently in
the assassination and its ‘investigation’ continually
show up in contemporary political life? Are they
being ‘rewarded’ for a ‘job well done”?
26) Why did the U.S. Government deliberately
LIE to the American People and World about
what they knew of the events of the assassination?
Why do they CONTINUE to do so?
27) Who felt threatened by JFK? And who
gained by his murder? Who had the means to kill
him and cover it up to look like the work of a
lone-nut?
28) How was the Media sometimes cleverly
controlled and, at times, complicit in the coverage
of events, facts and fiction?
29) Which Mafia bosses and employees, many
of whom worked for and with the CIA, were
involved in the assassination?

30) What did LBJ mean when he said the U.S.
Government had been running a ‘Murder
Incorporated’ down in the Caribbean in the ’60’s?
31) Why did LBJ insist on being sworn in on
Air Force One when he was quite legally
President AUTOMATICALLY upon the death of
JFK?
32) Why were some of the very same persons
who were in Dallas on 11/22/63 also just by
‘coincidence’ near the RFK murder and Memphis
for the MLK assassination?
33) Why did so MANY fear for their lives in the
wake of an assassination by a (then dead) lonenut? Why did so many die suddenly, mysteriously
and ‘conveniently’?
34) Why did the FBI not react to an informant’s
report that Joseph Milteer knew in detail how
JFK was going to be assassinated weeks before
the event? Why did the public never hear that
Milteer traveled hundreds of miles to witness the
execution with his own eyes? Why was he never
questioned by the Warren Commission, House
Select Committee or anyone else?
35) Why were the few who attempted to tell
the truth of the events harassed, punished, fired
from their jobs, discredited, intimidated,
marginalized, threatened and often killed?
36) Why did all those who met in Ruby’s
apartment the evening Ruby killed Oswald die
mysteriously thereafter?
37) Why did so many bullets and so much of
the physical evidence ‘disappear’?
38) Who were the multitude of PHONY ‘CIA’
and ‘Secret Service’ persons (complete with
official looking ID) on the Grassy Knoll and
around Dealey Plaza on 11/22/63? Why were they
stopping persons from moving into certain
locations?
39) Why did the driver of the Presidential
limousine slow the car during the fusillade rather
than accelerate?
40) Why did Secret Service men jump over the
body of LBJ and not JFK?
41) Why were several of the Secret Service
agents out drinking very late the night before at a
club owned by a friend of Ruby’s?
843

“J.F.K. Assassination, 11/22/63: Coincidence or Conspiracy?”

42) What did Jack Ruby know when he said
“I’m Jack Ruby. You don’t know me, but you soon
will” just BEFORE the assassination?
43) What evidence is there that Ruby, Oswald
and Tippit (as well as others possibly involved) all
knew and had been seen meeting each other?
44) Why was so much evidence and testimony
suppressed and at times altered?
45) Why to THIS DAY do many live in fear to
speak the truth of what they saw or know of the
events of Dallas 11/22/63?
46) Why are powerful forces trying to discredit
the new JFK movie? Why have ‘critics’ of the
official version of events long been subject to
harassment, surveillance and more?
47) Why were so MANY of the movies and
photos taken in Dealey Plaza that day
CONFISCATED by persons representing
themselves as government officials and NEVER
returned nor shown to the public?
48) Why do governmental and extragovernmental forces STILL spin dis-information
stories related to 11/22/63 and its aftermath?
49) Why were several witnesses offered bribes
and/or threatened by the FBI and others to NOT
disclose the truth of what they saw?
50) Why were witnesses coached and badgered
to get the testimony the Warren Commission
‘wanted’ to hear? Why were those who saw a
different scenario ignored or worse?
51) Why did Warren suggest the Report NOT
be published to save printing costs?
52) Why and how did police have a full
description of Oswald before those on the
investigation scene could have assembled any
information to lead to such a conclusion?
53) Why did some newspapers get information
only the FBI and CIA had on Oswald to print in
their stories within hours of the event? Who
leaked this information or had it on hand prior?
54) Why do so few know of the photos that show
clear evidence of a conspiracy and even show
images of the other conspirators and gunmen?
55) What is known of the multiplicity of
mysterious activities of many in Dallas and Dealey
Plaza that day?
844

56) Why did the FBI and CIA at the
HIGHEST levels suppress information and work
to foil a real investigation into aspects of the
assassination?
57) What were the many Nazi and Fascist
connections to the assassination?
58) What evidence is there of MULTIPLE
gunmen in the School Book Depository and other
buildings, as well as the Grassy Knoll?
59) Why was ‘Lee Harvey Oswald’ repeatedly
seen at several places SIMULTANEOUSLY in the
weeks before the assassination and who were
those impersonating him and why?
60) What evidence shows that the person
murdered by Ruby is NOT the person exhumed
from that grave?
61) Why were so many of the medical
evidences tampered with or made to ‘disappear’?
Why were so many others seemingly altered?
62) Why did someone construct forged
composite photos to frame Lee Harvey Oswald
prior to the assassination?
63) Why did the JFK autopsy doctor who
burned his notes and first draft of the autopsy
report get a promotion shortly after this
obstruction of justice and/or alteration of fact?
64) Why do the locations of wounds as seen by
a team doctors in Dallas and that evening by
another team of doctors in Bethesda Naval
Hospital NOT match in number or location!?
65) Why did the CIA and other government
entities try to discredit and obstruct Garrison’s
investigation and frame him on false charges?
Why were they so afraid of his investigation?
66) Who was the Army Intelligence man in and
around the Texas School Book Depository?
67) Why were Jack Ruby and several of the
Dallas Police and others seen repeatedly at
multiple assassination-related locations in Dallas
that day? How did they seem to ‘know’ where the
‘action’ was—or was to be?
68) Why do different documents and
identifications of Lee Harvey Oswald show
different height and even different faces—not to
mention names? What was Lee Harvey Oswald’s
REAL ‘mission’ in the USSR and in New Orleans

“J.F.K. Assassination, 11/22/63: Coincidence or Conspiracy?”

and Dallas after his return? Who did he work for?
CIA? FBI? ONI?
69) Who were the several different men seen
fleeing from the Plaza seconds after the shots
rang out?
70) Why did the eye-witness reports of persons
seeing men with rifles in Dealey Plaza before and
during the shooting receive so little ‘official’
attention and even suppression?
71) Why was JFK’s body ILLEGALLY removed
from Dallas and Texas jurisdiction? Why did the
FBI remove all of the other physical evidence to
Washington? Why was a Grand Jury never
convened?
72) Why did the Warren Commission and FBI
seem to repeatedly and consistently mis-spell the
names of those who’s involvement might shed
light on a possible conspiracy? Was this
‘conspiratorial dyslexia’ on the government’s
part?
73) Were one or more bullets and bullet
fragments removed secretly from JFK’s brain as
much evidence indicates?
74) Why was his brain never sectioned and
studied? Why and to where did it disappear along
with other essential medical evidence?
75) Why do the descriptions of the size, color
and other details of the coffin JFK’s body was
placed into in Dallas NOT match those his body
was in when it arrived for autopsy in Washington?
Was there a ‘switch’ and tampering with the body
during the flight?
76) Why were the autopsy doctors ORDERED
to NOT follow certain STANDARD medical
procedures and investigate certain wounds etc.?
77) What was the Government’s role in
obstruction of justice after the fact . . . if not
before?
78) Why were the seven particular persons on
the Warren Commission selected? Why did
several have intelligence community connections?
Why were some enemies of JFK?
79) Has our Government been ‘illegitimate’
since 11/22/63? Are we still living with the legacy
of a coup d’etat in America? Are the ‘coup’
leaders still firmly in control?

80) Is: ‘ignorance bliss’? Does: ‘knowledge
imply responsibility’? Does: ‘silence equal
complicity’?
81) What can be done to understand and finally
undo this entire (long overdue) situation? Is
Knowledge and Truth the first step to talking back
our country? What ARE the facts? Why are they
obscured from the average American?
82) Is the assassination of JFK the PIVOTAL
event of American History since the Second
World War? Is an understanding of the events a
NECESSARY precursor to understanding
EVERY MAJOR political event that has happened
since—right up to TODAY!?
83) Why did Jack Ruby suddenly have a
dramatic improvement in his financial situation
just prior to the assassination?
84) Why did several persons not ‘officially’
thought to have been involved suddenly flee
Dallas immediately after the Event?
85) Why did the Washington D.C. phone
system fail for several minutes immediately during
and after the assassination?
86) Why were most of the Cabinet conveniently
and coincidentally out of the country at the
time?
87) Why was the Navy man with the launch
codes for the atomic weapons separated from JFK
and LBJ? What foreknowledge did the Military
have? What possible participation?
88) Can the deaths and destruction at home
and abroad in Vietnam and ALL the subsequent
wars be understood by an analysis of the JFK
assassination?
89) Was Lee Harvey Oswald a CIA agent, as
much evidence seems to indicate?
90) Need the American People question if our
government and institutions of government have
had ANY legitimacy since 11/22/63?
91) What Right-Wing groups and Businessmen
were involved in the plot? Why?
92) Why were NO notes kept by ANYONE
who interrogated Lee Harvey Oswald over a 48 hr
period?
93) Why did Lee Harvey Oswald say “I am just
a patsy”? Was he 100% correct?
845

“Adam Weishaupt, 1776, The Green Back, and All That”

94) Why does much evidence show that Lee
Harvey Oswald did not even hold a rifle that
day—and perhaps NOT even OWN one?
95) Why did then Governor Reagan refuse to
extradite several persons suspected of direct
involvement in the assassination for trial and then
get suggested as a Presidential candidate?
96) Why did Lee Harvey Oswald have to be
executed within 48 hrs of his alleged crime? Was
he ‘supposed’ to have been killed prior?
97) How did Ruby gain entry into the Police
station? Were the police waiting for Ruby to enter
before moving Oswald?
98) Why did forces high in the FBI order the
DESTRUCTION of a note Oswald had given to
FBI agent Hosty in Dallas days before the
assassination?
99) Why do CIA and other documents show a
coordinated effort to ‘destroy’ the critics of the
Warren Commission and the Government’s BIG
LIE of the events of 11/22/63?
100) Did America DIE along with JFK that day
in Dallas 11/22/63? Can we revive it and take back
OUR country from the assassins and their heirs?
Are we as a People more satisfied with the
‘COMFORTABLE LIE’ or the
‘UNCOMFORTABLE TRUTH’?!?
Source
Originally at http://www.bigfoot.com/conspiracies.
Now available at http://www.conspiracy-net.com/
archives/articles/conspiracy/assassinations/
CNCka034.txt.

“Adam Weishaupt, 1776,
The Green Back, and All That” (1990s)
This article by an unnamed author sets out a popular analysis of the symbolic elements of the dollar
bill as evidence of an Illuminati-led conspiracy that
has dominated U.S. politics and finance since the
founding of the republic.
The quest for world domination can be traced
back to the creation of the “illuminati,” a secret
society, in 1776. Their leader, Adam Weishaupt,
wrote out the master plan to bring about the
846

subjection of the whole human race to an oligarchy
of financiers. The word “illuminati” is derived from
Lucifer and means “holders of the light.”
As surprising as it may seem, the insignia of the
order of the illuminati appears on the reverse side
of U.S. one-dollar bills. The first time it appeared
was in 1933, by order of U.S. President Franklin
D. Roosevelt, at the beginning of the new deal.
One can read at the base of the 13 story
pyramid, the year 1776 (MDCCLXVI). Most
people think that it represents the date of the
signing of the American Declaration of
Independence, but it actually memorializes the
foundation of the order of the illuminati, which
was May 1, 1776.
The pyramid represents the conspiracy for the
destruction of the Catholic church (and all existing
religions), and the establishment of a one-world
government, or a United Nations dictatorship. The
eye radiating in all directions, is the all-spying eye
that symbolizes the terroristic, gestapo-like
espionage agency that Weishaupt set up to guard
the “secret of the order and to terrorize the
populace into the acceptance of its rule.” The latin
words “ANNUIT COEPTIS” mean “our enterprise
(conspiracy) has been crowned with success.”
Below, “NOVUS ORDO SECLORUM” explains
the nature of the enterprise: a “new social order” or
a “new world order.”
This insignia was adopted by the U.S. Congress
as the reverse of the seal of the United States on
September 15, 1789. The appearance of this
insignia of the illuminati on U.S. one dollar bills in
1933 meant that the followers of Weishaupt
regarded their efforts as beginning to “be
crowned with success,” and that they totally
controlled the U.S. Government.
The financiers, who control the U.S.
government, think that they are smarter than god
himself, and that they are the only ones who can
lead mankind properly. The members of the
illuminati are people of every race and creed, but
who all lust for money and power.
The people must take practical steps to
counteract this diabolical plan by insisting that the
issue of money, and the control thereof, be placed

“Alien/CIA Connection”

back in the hands of the Government where it
rightfully belongs as stated in the Constitution.
In the words of Jesus Christ “The truth will set
you free.”
Source
Available at http://www.conspiracy-net.com/archives/
articles/conspiracy/banking/CNCh0010.txt.

“Alien/CIA Connection” (early 1990s)
This uncredited Internet posting summarizes the
increasingly popular view that aliens have not only
landed, but that the U.S. government has been instigating a cover-up since the 1950s. The complete text
weaves together a variety of theories, ranging from
revelations about government collusion with aliens
to predictions of nuclear holocaust in 1999.
In 1954, a race of large-nosed aliens known as
the “Greys” which had been orbiting the Earth,
landed at Holloman Air Force Base. A basic
agreement was reached. This race identified
themselves as originating from a planet around a
red star in the Constellation of Orion which we
called Betelgeuse. They stated that their planet
was dying and that at some unknown future time
they would no longer be able to survive there.
This led to a second landing at Edward Air Force
Base. The historical event had been planned in
advance and details of the treaty had been agreed
upon. President Eisenhower arranged to be in
Palm Springs on vacation. On the appointed day
the President was spirited away to the base and
the excuse was given to the press that he was
visiting a dentist.
President Eisenhower met with the aliens and a
formal treaty between the Alien Nation and the
United States of America was signed. We then
received our first Alien Ambassador from outer
space. His name and title was His “Omnipotent
Highness Krill” pronounced Krill. You should
know that the Alien flag is known as the
“Trilateral Insignia.” It is displayed on their craft
and worn on their uniforms. Both of these
landings and the second meeting were filmed.
The films exist today.

The treaty stated: The aliens would not
interfere in our affairs and we would not interfere
in theirs. We would keep their presence on earth
a secret. They would furnish us with advanced
technology and would help us in our technological
development. They would not make any treaty
with any other earth nation. They could abduct
humans on a limited and periodic basis for the
purpose of medical examination and monitoring
of our development with the stipulation that the
humans would not be harmed, would be returned
to their point of abduction, that the humans
would have no memory of the event, and that the
Alien nation would furnish MJ–12 with a list of all
human contacts and abductees on a regularly
scheduled basis. [ . . .]
It was also agreed that bases would be
constructed underground for the use of the Alien
nation and that two bases would be constructed
for the joint use of the Alien nation and the
United States Government. Exchange of
technology would take place in the jointly
occupied bases. These Alien bases would be
constructed under Indian reservations in the four
corners of Utah, Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona,
and one would be constructed in Nevada in the
area known as S–4, located approximately seven
miles south of the western border of Area 51,
known as Dreamland. All alien areas are under
complete control of the Naval Department and all
personnel who work in these complexes receive
their checks from the Navy. Construction of the
bases began immediately, but progress was slow
until large amounts of money were made available
in 1957. Work continued on the “Yellow Book.”
[ . . .]
The events at Fatima in the early part of the
century were scrutinized [by a “secret government
study”]. On suspicion that it was alien
manipulation, an intelligence operation was put
into motion to penetrate the secrecy surrounding
the event. The United States utilized its Vatican
moles that had been recruited and nurtured
during World War II, and soon obtained the
entire Vatican study which included the prophecy.
This prophecy stated that if man did not turn
847

Police against the New World Order, “Operation Vampire Killer 2000”

from evil and place himself at the feet of Christ,
the planet would self destruct and the events
described in the book of Revelations would
indeed come to pass. It stated that a child would
be born who would unite the world with a plan
for world peace and a false religion beginning in
1992. By 1995 the people would discern that he
was evil and was indeed the Anti-Christ. World
War III would begin in the Middle East in 1995
with an invasion of Israel by a United Arab nation
using conventional weapons, which would
culminate in a nuclear holocaust in the year 1999.
Between 1999 and 2003 most of the life on this
planet would suffer horribly and die as a result.
The return of Christ would occur in the year
2011. [ . . .]
At some point President Kennedy discovered
portions of the truth concerning the drugs and the
aliens. He issued an ultimatum in 1963 to MJ–12.
President Kennedy assured them that if they did
not clean up the drug problem, he would. He
informed MJ–12 that he intended to reveal the
presence of aliens to the American people within
the following year and ordered a plan developed
to inplement his decision. President Kennedy was
not a member of the Council on Foreign
Relations and knew nothing of “Alternative Two”
or “Alternative Three.” Internationally, the
Operations were supervised by an Executive
Committee known as the “Policy Committee.” In
the United States they were supervised by MJ–12
and in the Soviet Union by its sister organization.
President Kennedy’s decision struck fear into
hearts of those in charge. His assassination was
ordered by the Policy Committee and the order
was carried out by agents of MJ–12 in Dallas.
Source
Originally posted at http://www.bigfoot.
com/conspiracies. Now located at http://www.
darkconspiracy.com/articles.htm.

Police against the New World Order,
“Operation Vampire Killer 2000” (1992)
This document was written in 1992 by a group
called Police against the New World Order. It sets
848

forth an apocalyptic analysis of the New World
Order as a plan to enslave American citizens in the
lead-up to the millennium, and combines this conspiratorial rhetoric with the language of white
supremacy and end-times theology in a call to
arms. Although it touches most of the far-right conspiracy bases, it insists that alien/UFO stories are a
deliberate disinformation campaign designed to
prepare the masses for a necessary one-world government to combat the imagined alien threat.
THE NEW AGE/NEW WORLD
GOVERNMENT PLAN
Many of our nation’s INTERNAL
PROTECTORS know of the well-laid plan which
will culminate before the year 2000, to usher the
United States, along with the rest of the nations of
the world, into a “utopian” global community
allegedly under the control of a “philanthropic”
United Nations. A great many of our fellow
Officers and National Guardsmen are taking a
stand against this plan because they realize that
their fellow Americans were never allowed to
know of this plan nor given the opportunity to
vote on such a change in their government. In
addition, the officers are concerned patriots and
realize that this plan of world domination is
injurious in the extreme, and a total fraud
perpetrated against the people of the world!
This publication outlines the plan of these
American Internal Protectors which they believe
will stop this diabolical agenda.
THE NEW ORDER
Allegedly this new order is being set up to save
THE PEOPLE OF THE WORLD from a whole
variety of “imminent” life and world-threatening
disasters. Of those sworn protectors of the people
that are aware of this global scheme, few realize
that the actual behind-the-scenes plan is for an
oligarchy of the world’s richest families to place
1/2 the masses of the earth in servitude under
their complete control, administered from behind
the false front of the United Nations. To facilitate
management capabilities, the plan calls for the
elimination of the other 2.5 billion people through
war, disease, abortion and famine by the year

Police against the New World Order, “Operation Vampire Killer 2000”

2000. As we can plainly see, their plan for
“Population Control” (reduction) is well
established and under way.
Our OPERATION VAMPIRE KILLER 2000
plan involves the awakening (education) of our
fellow officers to the extreme need for them to
take an immediate and active roll in assisting their
fellow Americans in stopping this plan for world
dominion, using every lawful means available.
[ . . .]
It is felt that this name reflects the actual
program in which officers are involved, designed to
stop or “kill off” the ongoing, elitist, covert
operation which has been installed in the American
system with great stealth and cunning. They, the
Globalists, have stated that the date of termination
of the American way of life is the year 2000.
Therefore it is fitting that our date to terminate, at
the very least, their plan, is also the year 2000.
LET IT BE WELL UNDERSTOOD, WE
PROTECTORS OF THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
HAVE NOT ASKED FOR THIS BATTLE. IT IS
OUR NATION’S ENEMIES WHO HAVE
BROUGHT THIS FIGHT TO THE VERY
DOOR OF EVERY GOOD AMERICAN.
BE IT RESOLVED:
Our prayer and promise is to do all within our
power, as faithful countrymen, to overthrow this
evil, treasonous plan in a completely non-violent,
lawful manner.
-Our sworn duty is to protect the people of this
nation and its constitutional, republican form of
government from any enemy that would come
against it.
-Our pledge is that WE WILL, BY EVERY
MEANS GIVEN UNTO US, UPHOLD OUR
OATHS AND FULFIL OUR SWORN DUTY
TO OUR COUNTRYMEN.
PUTTING THE STAKE THROUGH
DRACULA’S HEART
WHAT CAN WE DO, WHAT SHOULD WE
DO? The Globalists’ agenda is a diabolical
program which, through patient gradualism, is
slowly draining the moral, economic and political
life blood from the United States and the hard
working American people.

We in America, Officers and private citizens
alike, are fortunate that at this moment in our
history we can still LAWFULLY
EXTERMINATE these parasitic Global Blood
Suckers by placing numerous “STAKES” made of
words, paper, pen, and hard work through their
hardened hearts.
TRAITORS’ GRAND FINALES (Martial Law
the Goal)
PLAN A
RACE WARS: We will see the fanning of the
flames of their planned RACE WAR program in
the months ahead as government, through some
of their covert national organizations, promotes
“whites hating people of color” and vice-versa.
Aided by their controlled media, and NWO
government-paid agitators/”leaders” on both sides,
the goal is to frighten Americans, of all colors,
into accepting Martial Law.
These elitists actually have no love for
“minorities” or “commoners” of any race. Those
who have studied these Imperialists will notice
that there is continual intermarriage among these
super-rich Internationalists’ families. NEVER do
they participate in the mixing of blood other than
BLUE BLOOD.
The race-mixing program was created for their
“subjects”—i.e., the world’s common people of all
races. Some of these Internationalists have stated
over the years, “ . . . when all other humans are of
one color, (brown), then they will be more easily
managed.”
KEEP THE RACES FROM JOINING
TOGETHER!
Racial strife is one of their most important
NWO tools and they mean to keep it going. It has
worked well for promoting the globalist cause in
the recent past. HATE must be kept flowing to
prevent the various races in America from finding
out the truth. If they find out who is destroying
their freedoms and economic future, they might
find some way to work together to overthrow their
COMMON ENEMY.
WHO ARE THE AGENT-PROVOCATEURS?
Our problem is in identifying these NWO
lackeys (agent/provocateurs). Incoming
849

Police against the New World Order, “Operation Vampire Killer 2000”

intelligence over the years has informed us that
these provocateurs are of all racial mixes. Yes,
whites, blacks, hispanic etc. are involved in
promoting planned racial hate incidents and
tensions to assist in causing the masses to accept
Martial Law and serve the NWO gang. Although
these employee/provocateurs have been promised
a position of power in this “utopian” Socialist
society, it is a shame that they are not smart
enough to know that they are to be “eliminated”
when their usefulness has run out. (As has been
the practice of every Marxist/Socialist conquering
army after taking power.)
There is sound logic in this “execution of your
agent/provocateurs,” after you’re in power. The
logic is: If these agents will spy and turn against
their own people then there is no way you can
trust them to not turn on you.” VERY TRUE! The
other shame is that no tears will be shed for these
traitors to their own people.
PLAN B
The globalists, along with their controlled
media, are well along in the promotion of their
PLAN B program. Here it is: With the threat of
nuclear war supposedly subsiding, the American
people “must have” a new Boogie Man!
ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE: This phase
involves the fraud of the “imminent ecological
collapse of the world.” This phase is being
promoted by those who were not able to
completely destroy America with Marxism. These
NWO Marxists have therefore started, or taken
over, the various GREEN (environmentalist)
parties.
Many of these environmentalists are rightfully
labeled the “WATERMELONS of the world.”
That is to say, green on the outside, but RED
(Marxist) on the inside. Many wonderful, good,
well-intentioned Americans are being duped into
assisting with this fraud. Sadly, some are our
families and friends.
PLAN C
VISITORS FROM AFAR: This phase makes
certain that few Americans escape the NWO
program. How? By creating TOTAL PANIC. This
is accomplished with 3 choices being offered to
850

the gullible. The Globalists have “suddenly”
brought to light their long planned and well
established “UFO-Little-Devils-from-OuterSpace” CON, to strike utter fear in the hearts of
all the people of the earth.
-The first choice: The subtle message to us,
“the masses” is that, if we don’t go willingly and
gently into global government, we will be “eaten,”
“raped,” or become the experimental guinea pigs
of some far-out evil “SPACE CADETS.” And of
course, you can’t ask for assistance and protection
from your own country’s government because as
we all have been told, “no individual nation could
possibly stand a chance in defense against this
obviously “ ‘Superior’ Race from space.” AH, but
isn’t it wonderful that “salvation” is only a oneworld government away?!?
-A second twist to this planned scenario is:
These “cute little space things” are our BOSOM
BUDDIES; they bring tidings of good will, and
come “conveniently” to SAVE our world from the
brink of total destruction! “Isn’t that precious?!”
In other words, this particular plan is to
convince gullible Americans that anyone or
anything (but that Jesus Christ “guy”), WILL
SAVE OUR WORLD!
Quite “coincidentally,” these same “funny little
fellows” are also here to set up a UTOPIAN
GLOBAL SOCIETY! Surprised? [ . . .]
(Some of the above information has come from
those on the “inside” and some from “outside” of
our government. It’s nice to have our own agents
inside their anti-American, anti-God cliques.
What is that French word—TOUCHÉ”?)
ENEMY’s WORST NIGHTMARE
Pushing hard for their vision of a collectivist,
“utopian” New World Order, the behind-thescenes controllers of Clinton, Bush and Perot
undoubtedly have as their worst nightmare the
prospect that you, their ENFORCERS, might
awaken and return to the side of the People.
Their plan cannot succeed unless you will act
without thinking, not understanding how they will
manipulate and use you to implement their plan
for world conquest. Think about it: Whatever
would they do if you, because of your strong

House Judiciary Committee, “The Inslaw Affair”

patriotism, decide to do nothing more than
uphold your oath of service and protection to the
People of America and JUST SAY “NO”? What
could they do?
GREAT POWER IN YOUR HANDS
Have you ever desired great power? Dear
Officer, Guardsman, Soldier, you already have
GREAT POWER!! The secret enemies now in
control of America know of your great power,
even if you don’t. That is why they will do
anything to stop you from learning about your
power. They cannot allow you to be awakened,
because they know that if you, our nation’s
INTERNAL PROTECTORS, turn from being
Enforcers of the SYSTEM, and return to being
PROTECTORS of the PEOPLE, there is no way
they can pull off their coup. [ . . .]
As stated earlier, these treacherous
Internationalists absolutely cannot accomplish
their goals without the nation’s Enforcers aiding &
abetting their treasonous, unconstitutional
mandates. But, they know also that for the most
part if they can label certain patriotic Americans
as “criminals,” most of our fellow Police Officers
will respond accordingly and treat them as such.
This is presently occurring in many areas. IRS
Director, Donald Alexander, admitted to Congress
20 years ago, “We now have so many regulations
that everyone is guilty of some violation.” Imagine
what it’s like today.
Another such attempt, is not only to label as
“criminals” those who refuse to relinquish or
register weapons of personal defense, but also all
those Americans who wish to exercise their
Constitutionally-guaranteed right to dissent or
speak out. Such as we officers have done in this
publication and we do regularly through the AID
& ABET Police Newsletter. [ . . .]
For those of our brothers and sisters who have
children, this very evening quietly steal in and
look down into the small faces of your posterity
and ask yourselves this question: Can there be a
greater work than to save our nation for these
little ones? Working together with our fellow
countrymen, we can place the final stake through
the heart of this Parasitic Beast that has gripped

our once vibrant nation by the throat. In so doing,
we will secure for ourselves, our children and
grandchildren, a grand and marvelous future.
Sources
Police against the New World Order. “Operation
Vampire Killer 2000.” Available at http://www.
police-against-now.com. © 1992 Police against the
New World Order. All rights reserved.
Mulloy, Darren, ed. 1999. Homegrown
Revolutionaries: A Militia Reader. Norwich:
University of East Anglia Press.

House Judiciary Committee,
“The Inslaw Affair” (1992)
In 1982 Inslaw, a small computer software maker
under contract with the U.S. Department of Justice, delivered its Prosecutor’s Management Information System (PROMIS) software to the Justice
Department. The software was designed to help
prosecutors track complex investigations. Once
PROMIS was delivered to the U.S. Attorney General’s office, the Justice Department refused to pay
Inslaw the $10 million owed, forcing the company
into bankruptcy, after which the Justice Department seized the software. Since then, the PROMIS
software has become central to a number of highly
intricate conspiracy scenarios involving supersurveillance technology and government misdealings (see entry on The Octopus). The following
extract is from the House Judiciary Committee
investigation into the “Inslaw Affair.”
REP. BROOKS: The last item on our agenda
today is the consideration of the investigative
report “The Inslaw Affair,” which without
objection will be considered as read.
This report describes the Committee’s
investigation into serious allegations that highlevel Department of Justice officials were
involved in a criminal conspiracy to force Inslaw, a
small computer company, out of business and
steal its primary asset—a software system called
PROMIS.
Based on the Committee’s investigation and
two separate Federal court rulings, the draft
851

James Traficant Jr., “The U.S. Is Bankrupt”

report concludes that high-level Department of
Justice officials deliberately ignored Inslaw’s
proprietary rights in the enhanced version of
PROMIS and misappropriated this software for
use at locations not covered under contract with
the company. Justice then proceeded to challenge
Inslaw’s claims in court even though it knew that
these claims were valid and that the Department
would most likely lose in court on this issue. After
almost seven years of litigation and $1 million in
cost, the Department is still denying its culpability
in this matter.
Unfortunately, instead of conducting an
investigation into Inslaw’s claims that criminal
wrongdoing by high-level government officials
had occurred, Attorneys General Meese and
Thornburgh blocked or restricted Congressional
inquiries into the matter, ignored the findings of
two Federal courts and refused to seek the
appointment of an independent counsel. These
actions were taken in the face of a growing body
of evidence that serious wrongdoing had occurred
which reached the highest levels of the
Department. The evidence received by the
Committee during its investigation clearly raises
serious concerns about the possibility that a highlevel conspiracy against Inslaw did exist and that
great efforts have been expended by the
Department to block any outside investigation
into the matter.
Based on the evidence presented in this report,
it is clear that extraordinary steps are required to
resolve the Inslaw issue; the report recommends
that the Attorney General take immediate steps to
renumerate Inslaw for the harm the Department
has egregiously caused the company. It also
recommends that an independent counsel be
appointed with broad powers to investigate all
matters related to the allegations of wrongdoing
in the Inslaw matter.
In my view, Congress and the executive branch
must take immediate and forceful steps to restore
the public confidence and faith in our system of
justice which has been severely eroded by this
painful and unfortunate affair. I therefore urge all
members to support the adoption of this report.
852

Source
Statement of Representative Jack Brooks (D-Texas),
Chairman. 11 August 1992. House Judiciary
Committee, U.S. House of Representatives.

James Traficant, Jr., “The U.S.
Is Bankrupt” (1993)
In this 1993 speech, maverick Congressman James
Traficant (D-Ohio) addressed a near-empty House
and made the startling accusation that the United
States was technically bankrupt, and had in fact
been so since the Emergency Banking Act of 1933.
In making this attack, Traficant was drawing on a
long tradition of fears about the power of central
banking and the dangers of a paper money system
not supported by gold. Traficant was himself convicted in a federal court in 2002 of ten charges of
bribery, racketeering, and fraud, and was consequently dismissed from office. More than a few of
his supporters have suggested that there is a suspicious link between his outspoken comments and the
move to convict him.
Mr. Speaker, we are here now in chapter 11.
Members of Congress are official trustees
presiding over the greatest reorganization of any
Bankrupt entity in world history, the U.S.
Government. We are setting forth hopefully, a
blueprint for our future. There are some who say
it is a coroner’s report that will lead to our demise.
It is an established fact that the United States
Federal Government has been dissolved by the
Emergency Banking Act, March 9, 1933, 48 Stat.
1, Public Law 89–719; Declared by President
Roosevelt, being bankrupt and insolvent. H. J. R.
192, 73rd. Congress in session June 5, 1933—
Joint Resolution to Suspend the Gold Standard
and Abrogate the Gold Clause dissolved the
Sovereign Authority of the United States and the
official capacities of all United States Government
Offices, Officers and Departments and is further
evidence that the United States Federal
Government exists today in name only.
The receivers of the United States Bankruptcy
are the International Bankers, via the United

Freedom Networker, “Trained as Traitors, Liars and Slavemasters!”

Nations, the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund. All United States Offices,
Officials, and Departments are now operating
within a de facto status in name only under
Emergency War Powers. With the Constitutional
Republican form of Government now dissolved, the
receivers of the Bankruptcy have adopted a new
form of government for the United States. This
new form of government is known as a Democracy,
being an established Socialist/Communist order
under a new governor for America. [ . . .]
Gold and silver were such a powerful money
during the founding of the United States of
America, that the founding fathers declared that
only gold and silver coins can be “money” in
America. Since gold and silver coinage were heavy
and inconvenient for a lot of transactions, they
were stored in banks and a claim check was issued
as a money substitute. People traded their
coupons as money, or “currency.” Currency is not
money, but a money substitute. Redeemable
currency must promise to pay a dollar equivalent
in gold or silver money. Federal Reserve Notes
(FRN’s) made no such promises, and are not
“money.” A Federal Reserve Note is a debt
obligation of the federal United States
government, not “money.” The federal United
States government and the U.S. Congress were
not and have never been authorized by the
Constitution for the United States of America to
issue currency of any kind, but only lawful
money,—gold and silver coin. [ . . .]
Federal Reserve Notes (FRN’s) are unsigned
checks written on a closed account. FRN’s are an
inflatable paper system designed to create debt
through inflation (devaluation of currency).
Whenever there is an increase of the supply of a
money substitute in the economy without a
corresponding increase in the gold and silver
backing, inflation occurs. [ . . .]
Their lust is for power and control. Since the
inception of central banking, they have controlled
the fates of nations. [ . . .]
In 1933, the federal United States
hypothecated all of the present and future
properties, assets and labor of their “subjects,” the

14th Amendment U.S. citizens, to the Federal
Reserve System. In return, the Federal Reserve
System agreed to extend the federal United States
corporation all the credit “money substitute” it
needed. Like any other debtor, the federal United
States government had to assign collateral and
security to their creditors as condition of the loan.
Since the federal United States didn’t have any
assets, they assigned the private property of their
“economic slaves,” the U.S. citizens, as collateral
against the unpayable federal debt. They also
pledge the unincorporated federal territories,
national parks forest, birth certificates, and
nonprofit organizations, as collateral against the
federal debt. All has already been transferred as
payment to the international bankers.
Unwittingly, America has returned to its preAmerican Revolution, Feudal roots whereby all
land is held by a sovereign and the common
people had no rights to hold allodial title to
property. Once again, We the People are the
tenants and sharecroppers renting our own
property from a Sovereign in the guise of the
Federal Reserve Bank. We the People have
exchanged one master for another.
This has been going on for over eighty years
without the “informed” knowledge: Of the
American people, without a voice protesting loud
enough. Now it’s easy to grasp why America is
fundamentally bankrupt. [ . . .]
America has become completely bankrupt in
world leadership, financial credit and its
reputation for courage, vision and human rights.
This is an undeclared economic war. Bankruptcy,
and economic slavery of the most corrupt order!
Wake up America! Take back your country.
Source
The Congressional Record. 1993. Vol. 134, no. 33
(March 17). Available at http://autarchic.tripod.
com/files/bankrupt.html.

Freedom Networker, “Trained as Traitors,
Liars and Slavemasters!” (1994)
Like many documents from the conspiracy-minded
right wing, this article from the militia publication
853

Freedom Networker, “Trained as Traitors, Liars and Slavemasters!”

Freedom Networker puts the blame for the attack
on American liberties on a vast and long-running
conspiracy involving familiar suspects such as the
Illuminati, the Bilderbergers, the Council on Foreign Relations, and the Skull and Bones Society,
among others.
Did you know there are more than a million
among us who are trained as traitors to the
American constitutional way of life? Who are
slated to be our slavemasters under the New
World Order? Who are trained to treat us as
cattle unfit for self-determination and self-rule?
Who are trained to believe in their inherent
superiority. Who fancy themselves as destined to
rule and enslave us? Who are already in almost all
positions of power in this country?
Who are these million plus would be New
World Order slavemasters? Let’s not beat around
the bush. They are members of secret societies
called Skull and Bones, Freemasons (only the
highest degree of Freemasonry also called
Illuminized Freemasons are privy to the plot) and
their many spinoffs and controllers like the
Knights Templar, the Knights of Malta, Order of
the Eastern Star (female counterparts), the
Council of Foreign Relations, the Trilateral
Commission, the Bilderbergers (who are mostly
British and American and really run the show
with prominent Jews as fronts in many areas,
especially banking) and yet numerous other
tightly controlled groups, foundations, institutes
and closed organizations.
The subject for this discussion are the
Freemasons, the single largest block and who
touch our lives rather closely though we may be
unaware of it. They’re trained, mind you, to
fabricate lies with a sense of self-righteousness
and a straight face! They are modern Benedict
Arnolds for, just as Benedict Arnold sold out his
American compatriots to his British masters, these
modern traitors have been trained by their mostly
British and American super rich masters to
abrogate every virtue with which humans are
naturally endowed.

854

While many of our country’s founders were
Freemasons, they were not quite the breed as are
modern Freemasons. They were pre-Illuminati
Freemasons. From the beginning of Illuminism,
Freemasons were indoctrinated with notions of
superiority and a one world government, a
tyranny that would be presided over by the
Freemasons in alliance with the super rich who
are even more secretive yet. . . .
One of the symbols that tells us just how much
the New World Order and the Freemasons
already run the show is their Great Seal on the
dollar bill showing the tip of a pyramid having an
eye overlooking all. Its inscription is “Novus Ordo
Seclorum” meaning the New World Order. This
might be said to be subliminal advertising to
implant their Great Seal for conditioning us for
things to come. Remember, they had to be in
control of the U.S. Treasury and Mint to have the
dollar bill redesigned and printed with this on it!
The Freemasons and other secret orders are
already in control in America! They pretty much
hold all the political positions of significance from
the county level up through state and federal
government. They are not only widespread in
government at all levels, but in law enforcement,
banking, the legal fraternity, all courts in the land,
and touches our lives in yet other control positions.
Freemasons put up most of the candidates for
both the Republican and Democratic parties. In
short they and the New World Order win no
matter which “faction” wins or loses.
How do you uproot this unholy arrangement
operating under the guise of a democratically
elected government? (As one reader always says:
“Don’t just tell me about it. Get me out of the
misery. What is the solution? How do we get
ourselves out of this mess?”)
You and your neighbors can begin your
campaigns NOW to expose the Freemasons and
their wicked schemes to enslave us all. They hate
nothing more than exposure! Secret societies want
to stay secret!
The new issues are: “Are you a Freemason?”
Don’t expect an honest yes answer for they have

Committee on Veterans’ Affairs, “Is Military Research Hazardous to Veterans’ Health?”

been trained to lie. Freemasons are usually well
known to be that by neighbors. They often boast
about it. Discreet inquiries usually reveal this vital
data about those who put themselves up or who
are put up for local positions at the township, city
and county levels.
The township, city and county levels is where
we must take control! The big fish die when taken
out of the ocean and subjected to a lot of little
ponds. We must do this and soon! Remember,
there is little time. The year 2000 is supposed to
see the New World Order in place.
Again, the big issues in all elections are: Are
any of the candidate Freemasons? Freemasons
must be automatically exposed. Their
membership in a secret society alone is grounds
for voting for a nonFreemason. They take an oath
of office which they intend to violate at every
turn. They keep ONLY their secret oaths to the
brotherhood of Freemasons.
Freemasonry is a gigantic conspiracy against all
of us! Of its nearly four million members, more
than one million are “illuminized” and in on the
conspiracy to do what is outlined herein.
Freemasons are often ingratiating, gladhanders.
But some have been notable scoundrels. Notable
among them was Jacques De Molay who was
burned at the stake for his efforts to undermine
the French government and the Catholic Church.
He was a notorious homosexual and had a marked
taste for young boys. This is worth mentioning
because Jacques is today a martyr among
Freemasons and there is an order of Jacques De
Molay! The most honored person in this order in
America is President Bill Clinton! He is a
Freemason and belongs to several secret societies.
Another scoundrel of the first order was J.
Edgar Hoover. He was a 33rd degree Freemason.
He was a noted homosexual and a transvestite. He
refused to go after organized crime with the FBI
inasmuch as Mayer Lansky and other Mafia
participants had the goods on him. He did not
want to be exposed.
J. Edgar Hoover loaded the FBI with
Freemasons and Mormons who were founded

along Masonic lines. Educate, educate, educate!
You’re due to be a slave! Get your neighbors and
friends together for entertaining and informative
discussions and video viewings about the ways to
recapture America for ourselves.
Goethe has aptly said: “None are more
hopelessly enslaved than those who falsely believe
they are free.” Of course, it bears observing that
anyone who would enslave another is also a slave!
Sources
Freedom Networker. 1994. Vol. 1, no. 5 (November).
Copyright © 1994 the Freedom Networker. All
rights reserved.
Mulloy, Darren, ed. 1999. Homegrown
Revolutionaries: A Militia Reader. Norwich:
University of East Anglia Press.

Committee on Veterans’ Affairs,
“Is Military Research Hazardous to
Veterans’ Health?” (1994)
The following is an extract from one of the numerous official inquiries into the Gulf War Syndrome,
looking at suspicions that the illness may have been
caused by service personnel having been submitted
unwittingly to drug or nerve agent testing.
During the last 50 years, hundreds of thousands
of military personnel have been involved in
human experimentation and other intentional
exposures conducted by the Department of
Defense (DOD), often without a servicemember’s
knowledge or consent. In some cases, soldiers
who consented to serve as human subjects found
themselves participating in experiments quite
different from those described at the time they
volunteered. For example, thousands of World
War II veterans who originally volunteered to
“test summer clothing” in exchange for extra leave
time, found themselves in gas chambers testing
the effects of mustard gas and lewisite.
Additionally, soldiers were sometimes ordered by
commanding officers to “volunteer” to participate
in research or face dire consequences. For
example, several Persian Gulf War veterans
interviewed by Committee staff reported that they

855

Lawrence E. Walsh, Final Report of the Independent Counsel for Iran/Contra Matters

were ordered to take experimental vaccines
during Operation Desert Shield or face prison.
The goals of many of the military experiments
and exposures were very appropriate. For
example, some experiments were intended to
provide important information about how to
protect U.S. troops from nuclear, biological, and
chemical weapons or other dangerous substances
during wartime. In the Persian Gulf War, U.S.
troops were intentionally exposed to an
investigational vaccine that was intended to
protect them against biological warfare, and they
were given pyridostigmine bromide pills in an
experimental protocol intended to protect them
against chemical warfare.
However, some of the studies that have been
conducted had more questionable motives. For
example, the Department of Defense (DOD)
conducted numerous “man-break” tests, exposing
soldiers to chemical weapons in order to
determine the exposure level that would cause a
casualty, i.e., “break a man.” Similarly, hundreds
of soldiers were subjected to hallucinogens in
experimental programs conducted by the DOD in
participation with, or sponsored by, the CIA.
These servicemembers often unwittingly
participated as human subjects in tests for drugs
intended for mind-control or behavior
modification, often without their knowledge or
consent. Although the ultimate goal of those
experiments was to provide information that
would help U.S. military and intelligence efforts,
most Americans would agree that the use of
soldiers as unwitting guinea pigs in experiments
that were designed to harm them, at least
temporarily, is not ethical.
Whether the goals of these experiments and
exposures were worthy or not, these experiences
put hundred of thousands of U.S. servicemembers
at risk, and may have caused lasting harm to many
individuals.
Every year, thousands of experiments utilizing
human subjects are still being conducted by, or on
behalf of, the DOD. Many of these ongoing
experiments have very appropriate goals, such as
obtaining information for preventing, diagnosing,
856

and treating various diseases and disabilities
acquired during military service. Although
military personnel are the logical choice as human
subjects for such research, it is questionable
whether the military hierarchy allows for
individuals in subordinate positions of power to
refuse to participate in military experiments. It is
also questionable whether those who participated
as human subjects in military research were given
adequate information to fully understand the
potential benefits and risks of the experiments.
Moreover, the evidence suggests that they have
not been adequately monitored for adverse health
effects after the experimental protocols end.
Veterans who become ill or disabled due to
military service are eligible to receive priority
access to medical care at VA medical facilities and
to receive monthly compensation checks. In order
to qualify, they must demonstrate that their illness
or disability was associated with their military
service. Veterans who did not know that they were
exposed to dangerous substances while they were
in the military, therefore, would not apply for or
receive the medical care or compensation that
they are entitled to. Moreover, even if they know
about the exposure, it would be difficult or
impossible to prove if the military has not kept
adequate records. It is therefore crucial that the
VA learn as much as possible about the potential
exposures, and that the DOD assume
responsibility for providing such information to
veterans and to the VA.
John D. Rockefeller, West Virginia, Chairman.
Source
U.S. Senate. 1994. Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
Is Military Research Hazardous to Veterans’
Health? Lessons Spanning Half a Century. 103d
Cong., 2d sess. S. Prt. 8 December. Committee
Print, 103–197.

Lawrence E. Walsh, Final Report of
the Independent Counsel for Iran/
Contra Matters (1994)
The report of the Independent Counsel into the
Iran/Contra affair was highly critical of Reagan’s

Lawrence E. Walsh, Final Report of the Independent Counsel for Iran/Contra Matters

administration and Congress, charging them with
evasions, lies, conspiracies, and acts of obstruction.
The underlying facts of Iran/contra are that,
regardless of criminality, President Reagan, the
secretary of state, the secretary of defense, and
the director of central intelligence and their
necessary assistants committed themselves,
however reluctantly, to two programs contrary to
congressional policy and contrary to national
policy. They skirted the law, some of them broke
the law, and almost all of them tried to cover up
the President’s willful activities.
What protection do the people of the United
States have against such a concerted action by
such powerful officers? The Constitution provides
for congressional oversight and congressional
control of appropriations, but if false information
is given to Congress, these checks and balances
are of lessened value. Further, in the give and
take of the political community, congressional
oversight is often overtaken and subordinated by
the need to keep Government functioning, by the
need to anticipate the future, and by the everpresent requirement of maintaining consensus
among the elected officials who are the
Government.
The disrespect for Congress by a popular and
powerful President and his appointees was
obscured when Congress accepted the tendered
concept of a runaway conspiracy of subordinate
officers and avoided the unpleasant confrontation
with a powerful President and his Cabinet. In
haste to display and conclude its investigation of
this unwelcome issue, Congress destroyed the
most effective lines of inquiry by giving immunity
to Oliver L. North and John M. Poindexter so that
they could exculpate and eliminate the need for
the testimony of President Reagan and Vice
President Bush. [ . . .]
Despite extraordinary difficulties imposed by
the destruction and withholding of records, the
need to protect classified information, and the
congressional grants of immunity to some of the
principals involved, Independent Counsel was
able to bring criminal charges against nine

government officers and five private citizens
involved in illegal activities growing out of the
Iran/contra affair.
More importantly, the investigation and the
prosecutions arising out of it have provided a
much more accurate picture of how two secret
Administration policies—keeping the contras alive
“body and soul” during the Boland cut-off period
and seeking the release of Americans held hostage
by selling arms to Iran—veered off into
criminality.
Evidence obtained by Independent Counsel
establishes that the Iran/contra affair was not an
aberrational scheme carried out by a “cabal of
zealots” on the National Security Council staff, as
the congressional Select Committees concluded in
their majority report. Instead, it was the product
of two foreign policy directives by President
Reagan which skirted the law and which were
executed by the NSC staff with the knowledge
and support of high officials in the CIA, State and
Defense departments, and to a lesser extent,
officials in other agencies. [ . . .]
Independent Counsel found no evidence of
dissent among his Cabinet officers from the
President’s determination to support the contras
after federal law banned the use of appropriated
funds for that purpose in the Boland Amendment
in October 1984. Even the two Cabinet officers
who opposed the sale of arms to Iran on the
grounds that it was illegal and bad policy—
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and
Secretary of State George P. Shultz—either
cooperated with the decision once made, as in the
case of Weinberger, or stood aloof from it while
being kept informed of its progress, as was the
case of Shultz.
In its report section titled “Who Was
Responsible,” the Select Committees named CIA
Director William Casey, National Security
Advisers Robert C. McFarlane and John M.
Poindexter, along with NSC staff member Oliver
L. North, and private sector operatives Richard V.
Secord and Albert Hakim. With the exception of
Casey who died before he could be questioned by
the OIC, Independent Counsel charged and
857

Lawrence E. Walsh, Final Report of the Independent Counsel for Iran/Contra Matters

obtained criminal convictions of each of the men
named by Congress. There is little doubt that,
operationally, these men were central players.
But the investigation and prosecutions have
shown that these six were not out-of-control
mavericks who acted alone without the knowledge
or assistance of others. The evidence establishes
that the central NSC operatives kept their
superiors—including Reagan, Bush, Shultz,
Weinberger and other high officials—informed of
their efforts generally, if not in detail, and their
superiors either condoned or turned a blind eye
to them. When it was required, the NSC
principals and their private sector operatives
received the assistance of high-ranking officers in
the CIA, the Defense Department, and the
Department of State. [ . . .]
Fundamentally, the Iran/contra affair was the
first known criminal assault on the post-Watergate
rules governing the activities of national security
officials. Reagan Administration officials rendered
these rules ineffective by creating private
operations, supported with privately generated
funds that successfully evaded executive and
legislative oversight and control. Congress was
defrauded. Its appropriations restrictions having
been circumvented, Congress was led to believe
that the Administration was following the law.
Numerous congressional inquiries were thwarted
through false testimony and the destruction and
concealment of government records.
The destruction and concealment of records
and information, beginning at the twilight of
Iran/contra and continuing throughout
subsequent investigations, should be of particular
concern. Oliver North’s destruction of records in
October and November 1986 caused an
irretrievable loss of information to the executive
agencies responsible for regulating clandestine
activities, to Congress, and to Independent
Counsel. John Poindexter’s efforts to destroy NSC
electronic mail nearly resulted in comparable
damage. CIA Costa Rican Station Chief Joseph F.
Fernandez attempted to hide phone records that
would have revealed his contacts with Enterprise
activities.
858

This sort of obstruction continued even after
Independent Counsel’s appointment. In the
course of his work, Independent Counsel located
large caches of handwritten notes and other
documents maintained by high officials that were
never relinquished to investigators. Major aspects
of Iran/contra would never have been uncovered
had all of the officials who attempted to destroy
or withhold their records of the affair succeeded.
Had these contemporaneous records been
produced to investigators when they were initially
requested, many of the troublesome conflicts
between key witnesses would have been resolved,
and timely legal steps taken toward those who
feigned memory lapses or lied outright.
All of this conduct—the evasions of the
Executive branch and the Congress, the lies, the
conspiracies, the acts of obstruction—had to be
addressed by the criminal justice system.
The path Independent Counsel embarked upon
in late 1986 has been a long and arduous one.
When he hired 10 attorneys in early 1987,
Independent Counsel’s conception of the
operational conspiracy—with its array of
Government officials and private contractors, its
web of secret foreign accounts, and its world-wide
breadth—was extremely hazy. Outlining an
investigation of a runaway conspiracy disavowed by
the President was quite different from the
ultimate investigation of the President and three
major agencies, each with the power to frustrate
an investigation by persisting in the classification
of non-secret but embarrassing information.
Completing the factual mosaic required examining
pieces spread worldwide in activities that occurred
over a three-year period by officials from the
largest agencies of government and a host of
private operatives who, by necessity, design and
training, worked secretly and deceptively.
Source
United States Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit. 1994. Final Report of the
Independent Counsel for Iran/Contra Matters.
Part 4: Concluding Observations. 4 August.
Available at http://www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/walsh/
part_xi.htm.

Montana Freeman, “Mandamus Judicial Notice”

Montana Freemen, “Mandamus
Judicial Notice” (1994)
The following document is an example of legal filings
written by the Montana Freemen to charge government officials with wrongdoing. The Freemen filed
the document after the Garfield County attorney,
Nickolas Murnion, charged the thirteen Freemen
with impersonating public servants in March 1994.
It accuses state and local officials of depriving rights
to two Freemen, Karen and Clay Taylor, in a conspiracy. Although incomplete, the document conveys
the Freemen’s use of their legal system. The selection
ends abruptly because Garfield County destroyed
their copies of the document, but this fragment survived in an archive.
IN OUR ONE SUPREME COURT IN
JUSTUS TOWNSHIP
IN AND FOR DE JURE GARFIELD
COUNTY
MONTANA STATE DE JURE, UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA
JUSTUS TOWNSHIP)
GARFIELD COUNTY)
MONTANA STATE) SS.SUPREME COURT
PROCLAMATION
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA)LAWFUL
PRECEPT AND EDICT
By Common Law Affidavit of the Justices’
“MANDAMUS JUDICAL NOTICE”
Our original and exclusive jurisdiction supreme
court Justices’ hereby serve our one supreme
court Proclamation of Lawful Precept by our
Edict through our extra-ordinary mandamus
against the county of Garfield of the state of
Montana a “person” acting ultra vires through its
double agents Nickolas C. Murnion, Charles
Phipps, and the impostor non-certificated
Gregory Mohr a/k/a top gun who has been acting
without the scope of his/their authority in relation
to the freemen characters in de jure Garfield
county, injuring said freemen characters by
his/their criminal conspiracy commission of
criminal unlawful detainer, criminal forcible
detainer, criminal libel, criminal slander and
generally committing criminal acts unbecoming a

public servant, meaning by these express words an
employee of the federal government (a/k/a freely
associated federal compact party states) upholding
the declared national and international
bankruptcy.
Our writ of mandamus of Judicial Notice is
served upon your receiving officer Mike Cooney,
secretary of state as well as your bonded receiver
in equity, the office of the treasurer in Helena,
Montana state, and bonding agent a/k/a insurance
commissioner Mike O’Keefe, our co-plaintiff in
our United States of America.
You are hereby commanded by this writ of
mandamus to immediately take appellate Judicial
Notice of your own opinions as duly stated in the
school board closed meetings in Belgrade,
Montana state, U.S.A., some three or four years
past (maybe more) when some of you overzealous non-controllable lackeys did violate the
spirit and intent of the legislature by holding
secret meetings unbecoming an alien a/k/a
corporation a/k/a your cestui que trust a/k/a the
county of Garfield of the state of Montana, who by
your top gun did enter into the fiasco concerning
Karen Taylor and Clay Taylor in open de novo
court in Jordan, Montana state, U.S.A., before
your top gun who did openly admit your damning
secret meeting on video tape containing pictures
of faces and possible signatures of your feigned
posse members who were immorally seduced into
your criminal conspiracy in your willful, knowing
and felonious criminal cover-up for your bankers
buddies who cannot continue in their collateral
scheme of emitting bills of credit against the
collateral which your banker buddies have named
the common herd.
The necessarily causes for our one supreme
court by this letter rogatory for all good men to
come to the aid of their country-men, further
driving the sinking inland vice-admiralty ship of
immoral commerce to the bottom of the sea of
despair as in the Harlot of Babylon wherein the
whore-mongers are wailing and lamenting Babylon
is falling, Babylon is falling. Judicial Notice is
hereby taken by our one supreme court of original
and exclusive jurisdiction in our common law
859

Norman Mailer, Oswald’s Tale: An American Mystery

venue, and by writ of mandamus fully
acknowledged by your separate appellate
jurisdiction upon your sinful silence. Maxim of
jurisprudence he who sleeps upon his rights has
none. “You have a right to remain silent. You have
a right to an attorney. You have a right to a
licensed attorney if you can find one. Anything
which you say or which you do not say can and has
been used against you in our one supreme court of
common law venue of our original and exclusive
jurisdiction. If you cannot afford a licensed
attorney, none will be furnished for you by our one
supreme court in common law venue original and
exclusive jurisdiction. You have until midnight of
this banking day to default. Upon your dishonor in
our foreign jurisdiction, and upon our due protest,
your ship will have been duly considered to have
been successfully sunk. And commensurate billing
will immediately occur as against your bond via
your insurance commissioner who has been given
this Notice to Appear courtesy presentment, duly
bonded by our accommodation/surety/guarantor
signature by your own rules a/k/a U.C.C. § 3–415.
Praise Almighty God you individual joint and
several liability by your jettison of your most
unworthy cargo. [ . . .]
Source
Montana Freemen Collection at the Montana
Human Rights Network in Helena, Montana.

Norman Mailer, Oswald’s Tale:
An American Mystery (1995)
Norman Mailer was one of many countercultural
voices who questioned the official “lone gunman”
version of the Kennedy assassination in 1960s, and
at the time he called for an alternative commission
to reopen the case. By the time he came to write his
1995 nonfiction novel, Oswald’s Tale: An American
Mystery, however, he had reluctantly changed his
mind and concluded that it was more likely that
Oswald had actually killed the president after all.
But he argued that in order to make this theory
more plausible he had to understand Oswald’s
character.

860

For if Oswald remains intact as an important if
dark protagonist, one has served a purpose: The
burden of a prodigious American obsession has
been lessened, and the air cleared of an historic
scourge—absurdity. So long as Oswald is a petty
figure, a lone twisted pathetic killer who
happened to be in a position to kill a potentially
great President, then, as has been argued earlier
in this work, America is cursed with an absurdity.
There was no logic to the event and no sense of
balance in the universe. Historical absurdity (like
the war in Vietnam) breeds social disease.
We have, of course, an alternative posed by the
movie JFK. There, our President was killed by the
architects of a vast plot embracing the most
powerful officers of our armed forces, our
intelligence, and our Mafia, a massive array of
establishment evil that is thrilling to our need to
live imaginatively with great stakes in great wars,
but such a thesis also leaves us with horror: We
are small, and the forces of evil are huge.
Of course, the odds that a huge conspiracy can
succeed and remain hidden are also small. And
Oswald would have been the last man that a
leader of such a vast conspiracy would have
selected to be in on the action. While JFK satisfies
our growing and gloomy sense that nine tenths of
our freedom has been pre-empted by forces vastly
larger than ourselves (and Stone’s hypothesis gives
great power to the film), it does not come near to
solving the immediate question: Did Lee Harvey
Oswald kill JFK, and if he did, was he a lone
gunman or a participant in a conspiracy?
Given the yeast-like propensities of conspiracy
to expand and expand as one looks to buttress
each explanation, it can hardly be difficult for the
reader to understand why it is more agreeable to
keep to one’s developing concept of Oswald as a
protagonist, a man to whom, grudgingly, we must
give a bit of stature when we take into account the
modesty of his origins. That, to repeat, can
provide us with a sense of the tragic rather than of
the absurd. If a figure as large as Kennedy is
cheated abruptly of his life, we feel better,
inexplicably better, if his killer is also not without

William F. Jasper, “Conspiracy: Where’s the Proof?”

size. Then, to some degree, we can also mourn
the loss of possibility in the man who did the
deed. Tragedy is vastly preferable to absurdity.
Such is the vested interest that adheres to
perceiving Oswald as a tragic and infuriating hero
(or, if you will, anti-hero) rather than as a snarling
little wife-abuser or a patsy.
Source
Mailer, Norman. 1995. Oswald’s Tale: An American
Mystery. New York: Random House, 606–607. ©
Norman Mailer. All rights reserved.

James Traficant, “The
Federal Reserve” (1995)
This brief extract features former U.S. Representative James Traficant (D-Ohio) voicing conspiratorial fears about the power of the Federal Reserve
and its chairman, Alan Greenspan, in particular.
Mr. Speaker, in America the sun shines in from
the PTA to the Halls of Congress. The American
people have a front row seat.
But when it comes to the Federal Reserve
Board, the American people cannot buy a seat in
the peanut gallery. Unbelievable. At this very
moment the Fed behind closed doors is deciding
whether or not to raise our interest rates. And the
Fed says, “Look, our business is too important for
the American people to understand and what the
American people don’t know won’t hurt them.”
Unbelievable.
Mr. Speaker, while Congress cannot go to the
bathroom without a camera team, the Federal
Reserve Board conducts their own business and
Congress waits for Alan Greenspan to come out of
some closed door with either thumbs up or
thumbs down.
Mr. Speaker, I say it is very simple: Alan
Greenspan is giving America the finger and
Congress does not even know why.
Source
The Congressional Record, 1 February 1995.

William F. Jasper, “Conspiracy:
Where’s the Proof?” (1996)
In this 1996 article from the New American, the
John Birch Society magazine, William F. Jasper
examines what’s at stake in calling a view a conspiracy. One of the features of recent conspiracy
culture is an acute awareness by the proponents of
conspiracy theories of the accusations of paranoia
that are made against them. Jaspar argues that the
opening up of Soviet archives at the end of the cold
war has shown that allegations of Communist infiltration were true after all, and that we should not
be so hasty to dismiss conspiracy theorists as crackpots.
“What is the milieu in which criminal groups of
‘freemen’ and Oklahoma City bombers grow?”
asked Ira Straus in a May 13, 1996 op-ed for the
Christian Science Monitor. His answer: “It is the
underworld of conspiracy theory, a subculture in
which people share fantasies of fighting heroically
against a huge Conspiracy that is taking over the
world.” The Straus essay, “When Conspiracy
Theory Replaces Thought,” is subtitled, “The U.S.
is threatened by Americans who believe
Washington is part of a plot to enslave us in a
‘New World Order,’” and it is but one of the latest
and most blatant volleys in an ongoing campaign
by the establishment media to paint in blackest
terms anyone who uses the dread “C” word.
Crackpots and False Patriots
In his Monitor piece, Straus defines the
“problem” further: “For decades, the John Birch
Society has spread word of the Conspiracy: The
international bankers who pull all the strings. The
ones who really control both the Communist
conspiracy and the United States government.
The Trilateral Commission. The Federal Reserve,
which is ruining our money. The Council on
Foreign Relations—psst, they’re out to destroy
the Constitution, take away our guns, and enslave
us in a United Nations One-World Communist
government. Their code words: ‘New World
Order.’” According to Straus, who is U.S.

861

William F. Jasper, “Conspiracy: Where’s the Proof?”

coordinator of the Committee on Eastern Europe
and Russia in NATO, “Once a mind is trapped in
the circular logic of conspiracy theory, it rarely
finds a way out on its own.” And this is a very
“dangerous” thing indeed, he assures us, because
“crackpots” infected with such “Birchist fantasy”
are “capable of blowing up federal buildings.”
Similar rantings spill out of False Patriots: The
Threat of Anti-Government Extremists, a slick, 72page smear by the Southern Poverty Law
Center/Klanwatch, which is widely quoted in the
media as an authoritative source on “right-wing”
fanatics. “The Patriot movement,” claims the
SPLC diatribe, “is a potpourri of the American
right, from members of the Christian Coalition to
the Ku Klux Klan—people united by their hatred
of the federal government.”
After thus employing the most rancid of tactics
to unfairly associate everyone to the right of Bill
and Hillary with violent KKK racists, the SPLC
tract darkly warns: “If America is to be saved,
Patriots believe, our government must be
destroyed.” Like Straus’ screeching monitory, the
SPLC tirade warns that “Conspiracy theories fuel
the [Patriot] movement”: theories of a “New
World Order,” a “United Nations-dominated
global government,” and “an end to American
sovereignty.”
In like manner comes John J. Nutter, PhD, an
instant media-anointed “expert on extremism,”
whose utterances are uncritically accepted and
reverently repeated as gospel. In a syllabus he
provided to members of the law enforcement
community who attended his seminar in
Oklahoma on “Criminal Justice and Right-wing
Extremism in America,” Dr. Nutter listed
“Potential Warning Signs” which may indicate that
“an individual is active in an extremist group, or
planning violent or criminal activity.” Among the
“warning signs” according to Nutter: “Do they
mention: The Council on Foreign Relations
(CFR), the Trilateral Commission (Trilateralists),
David Rockefeller, Henry Kissinger,
Bilderbergers, the Illuminati”? Or do they show
“excessive concern” over the “United Nations, loss
of U.S. sovereignty to the UN . . . U.S.
862

participation in UN peacekeeping”? In Nutter’s
syllabus section entitled “Extremist Literature,”
we find THE NEW AMERICAN magazine and
books by its publisher, John F. McManus; its
senior editor, William Norman Grigg; and a
contributing author, G. Edward Griffin.
By now it is a tiresomely familiar theme
redundantly shrieked by the usual cacophonous
chorus: Bill Clinton, Janet Reno, Louis Freeh, the
New York Times, the Washington Post, Time
magazine, Anthony Lewis, Molly Ivins, Frank
Rich, Morris Dees, the Anti-Defamation League,
the ACLU, etc. According to the frantic refrains
of this querulous choir, those who mention
“conspiracy” or oppose the “new world order” and
the United Nations share culpability with those
terrorists who bombed the Murrah Building in
Oklahoma City. They are, shrills the choir,
“dangerous,” “irrational,” and “paranoid.” Those
who take a principled, courageous stand for
limited, constitutional government, who seek
change through legitimate, honorable means, and
who speak out against the abuses and usurpations
of big government, are denounced as “antigovernment.”
Drawing the most practiced tactic from their
slimy smear arsenal, the “liberals” attempt to
silence all opposition and debate by falsely and
cowardly tagging their adversaries with “fascist,”
“racist,” “anti-Semite,” “Neo-Nazi,” “KKK” labels.
It is a performance worthy of Lenin, who wrote:
“We can and must write in a language which sows
among the masses hate, revulsion, scorn, and the
like, toward those who disagree with us.” And the
most intense hate, revulsion, and scorn seems
always reserved for anti-communists who see
conspiracy.
Attacks from “Conservatives”
The liberal-left, to be sure, holds no monopoly on
hysterical antagonism to “conspiracy theory.”
Many conservatives likewise erupt in paroxysms of
pique at the mention of anything that may sound
even remotely related to conspiracy. Or they roll
their eyes and smirk in ostentatious displays of
smug superiority to the poor unsophisticated fools

William F. Jasper, “Conspiracy: Where’s the Proof?”

who “fall for grossly simplistic answers to complex
problems.”
Radio maestro Rush Limbaugh epitomizes this
type of pseudo-sophisticate. The grand poohbah
of broadcast blather and bombast reserves his
most vitriolic ridicule for those who express belief
in power politics, ruling elites, and the drive for
world government, calling them “conspiracy
wackos.” Engaging in the kind of reductio ad
absurdum for which “liberals” are infamous,
Limbaugh offers his listeners a “pop quiz”: “If
Trilateralist A is driving West at 60 miles per hour
and Trilateralist B is driving East at 75 miles per
hour, how long will it take to control the country?”
Or, even more typical of the liberal-left he claims
to hate, he fabricates a straw man, falsely
attributing positions to those he wishes to
discredit, as in his repeated false claim that the
John Birch Society has called “[William F.]
Buckley a communist.”
A similar but more highbrow approach is found
among conservative intellectuals such as Robert
James Bidinotto, a longtime contributor to The
Freeman and a lecturer for the respected
Foundation for Economic Education (FEE). In a
Freeman piece entitled “Conspiracy or
Consensus?” Bidinotto takes issue with those who
see “deliberate direction” in “a kind of powerful
force dragging modern society down,” or who
“deduce that the world is in the grip of a
powerful, malevolently directed conspiracy.”
“Conspiracy theory” is wrong, Bidinotto explains,
because it is based on “false logic,” “naïveté,” and
“explanatory elasticity.” “Yes—there is a powerful
force dragging society down,” he writes. “But that
undertow is not an international conspiracy; it’s an
intellectual consensus. What conspiratorialists fail
to appreciate is the power of ideas.”
Being a “conspiratorialist” who was once (long
ago) an unwitting dupe of collectivist ideology and
false “intellectual consensus,” this writer fully
appreciates the “power of ideas.” However, what
Bidinotto and his fellow “intellectual
consensusists” fail to appreciate is the idea of
power, and the will to power of evil men—men
who combine and conspire to further their evil

purposes, often using and promoting a fallacious
“intellectual consensus.”
Yes, there are certifiably “wacko”
conspiratorialists out there today promoting a
dizzying array of theories about invasions by
extraterrestrial creatures, UFO abductions, CIA
assassination schemes, papal plots for world
domination, Hitler clones in the Brazilian rain
forest, etc. But are these any more “wacko” than
this offering from Mr. Bidinotto:
In the 1950s, the puppeteers of world events
were supposedly the “international Communist
conspiracy.” The conspiracy was centrally directed
from Moscow, from which it extended globally
like the arms of an octopus. Iron discipline held
the conspirators together; highly publicized feuds
among various communist nations were merely
clever propaganda, meant to lull the West into
complacency.
Recent Revelations
Amazing! Absolutely amazing! Mr. Bidinotto’s
mocking jab at the supposed anti-communist
paranoia and hysteria of the 1950s is an incredibly
oddly timed capitulation to the lies, innuendos,
and treacherous deceits of the liberal-left—
incredibly oddly timed because even many of the
arch-avatars of the liberal-left pantheon are today
acknowledging as true precisely what anticommunists were saying for decades and what
Bidinotto now ridicules. Recently released
documents from the Soviet archives and from the
files of the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA)
prove (as if more proof were necessary) far more
than these charges. [ . . .]
As we have said, even many liberals have been
forced to acknowledge these truths. [ . . .]
However, today—as in decades past—American
high school and college students are still
subjected to the rabidly pro-Marxist, anti-anticommunist propaganda of subversive textbooks.
When it comes to reading about communism, the
Cold War, and related topics, their resources are
still likely to be The Paranoid Style in American
Politics, by Columbia University Professor
Richard Hofstadter; The Politics of Unreason:
863

Michael Rivero, “Fake Terror: The Road to Dictatorship”

Right-wing Extremism in America, 1790–1970, by
Seymour Martin Lipset and Earl Raab; The Fear
of Conspiracy, by Professor David Brion Davis;
Danger on the Right, by Benjamin R. Epstein and
Arnold Forster of the Anti-Defamation League;
The Great Fear, by David Caute; and other leftwing fare that has misguided the “intellectual
consensus” of the past two generations.
Communist Phenomenon
Yes, Mr. Bidinotto, there was a communist
conspiracy. And there is a communist conspiracy.
Communism has been, and remains, the single
most dramatically significant phenomenon of our
century. It has enslaved billions of souls across our
globe and has murdered between 100 million and
300 million. Even if one accepts the notion that
“the Soviet Empire disintegrated” (and we do not
[ . . .]), Communist China, Cuba, North Korea,
and other militant “Peoples Republics” continue
as before. And why should we now accept the
received “wisdom” of Sovietologists, Sinologists,
and other so-called “experts” who were terribly,
dangerously, obstinately wrong for so many
decades? [ . . .]
Source
Jasper, William F. 1996. “Conspiracy: Where’s the
Proof?” New American 12, no. 19 (16
September). All rights reserved. Reprinted with
permission of the New American. Available at
http://www.thenewamerican.com/tna/1996/
vo12no19/vo12no19_proof.htm.

Michael Rivero, “Fake Terror:
The Road to Dictatorship” (c. 1997)
In this article from his What Really Happened
website, Michael Rivero accuses American Presidents Bush (the senior and younger) and Clinton of
deliberately creating scares about foreign enemies
in order to justify their secret power objectives.
Like many other commentators on terrorist attacks,
such as the Oklahoma City bombing, Rivero makes
a comparison with the burning of the Reichstag in
Nazi Germany, arguing that the specter of domes864

tic terrorism in the United States has been deliberately and cynically conjured up in order to legitimate the suppression of liberty.
It’s the oldest trick in the book, dating back to
Roman times; creating the enemies you need.
[ . . .] President George Bush wanted a war in
Iraq. Like Crassus, George Bush is motivated by
money. Specifically oil money. But with the
OPEC alliance failing to keep limits on oil
production in the Mideast, the market was being
glutted with oil pumped from underneath Iraq,
which sat over roughly 1/3 of the oil reserves of
the entire region.
George wanted a war to stop that flow of oil, to
keep prices (and profits) from falling any further
than they already had. But like Roosevelt, he
needed the “other side” to make the first move.
Iraq had long been trying to acquire greater
access to the Persian Gulf, and felt confined to a
narrow strip of land along Kuwait’s northern
border, which placed Iraqi interests in close
proximity with hostile Iran. George Bush, who
had been covertly arming Iraq during its war with
Iran, sent word via April Glaspie that the United
States would not intervene if Saddam Hussein
grabbed a larger part of Kuwait. Saddam fell for
the bait and invaded.
Of course, Americans were not about to send
their sons and daughters to risk their lives for
petroleum products. So George Bush arranged a
hoax, using a public relations firm which has
grown rich on taxpayer money by being most
industrious and creative liars! The PR firm
concocted a monumental fraud in which the
daughter of the Kuwaiti Ambassador to the
United States, went on TV pretending to be a
nurse, and related a horror story in which Iraqi
troops looted the incubators from a Kuwaiti
hospital, leaving the premature babies on the cold
floor to die. The media, part of the swindle from
the start, never bothered asking why the “nurse”
didn’t just pick the babies up and wrap them in
blankets or something.
Enraged by the incubator story, Americans
supported operation Desert Storm, which never

Michael Rivero, “Fake Terror: The Road to Dictatorship”

removed Saddam Hussein from power but which
did take Kuwait’s oil off of the market for almost 2
years and limited Iraq’s oil exports to this very day.
That our sons and daughters came home with
serious and lingering medical illnesses was
apparently not too great a price to pay for
increased oil profits. [ . . .]
While several American Presidents have
willingly started wars for personal purposes,
perhaps no President has ever carried it to the
extreme that Bill Clinton has. [ . . .] Coincident
with the expected public statement of Monica
Lewinsky following her testimony, Bill Clinton
ordered a cruise missile attack on Sudan and
Afghanistan, claiming to have had irrefutable
proof that bogeyman extraordinaire (and former
Afghani ally) Osama Bin Ladin was creating
terrorist chemical weapons there.
Examination of the photos of the debris
revealed none of the expected structures one
would find in a laboratory that handled lethal
weapons-grade materials. Assurances from the
CIA that they had a positive soil test for biological
weapons fell on their face when it was revealed
that there had been no open soil anywhere near
the pre-bombed facility. Sudan requested that
international observers come test the remains of
the factory for any signs of the nerve gas Clinton
had insisted was there. None was found. The
Sudanese plant was a harmless aspirin factory, and
the owner has sued for damages. [ . . .]
Like Germany under Chancellor Hitler, there
have been events in our nation which strike fear
into the hearts of the citizens, such as the New
York World Trade Tower bombing [in 1993], the
OK City Federal Building, and the Olympic Park
bomb (nicely timed to divert the media from
witnesses to the TWA 800 shoot down). The
media has been very quick to blame such events
on “radicals,” “subversives,” “vast right wing
conspiracies,” and other “enemies in our midst,”
no different than the lies used by Cicero and
Hitler.
But on closer examination, such “domestic
terrorist” events do not appear to be what they
are made out to be. The FBI had an informant

inside the World Trade Tower bombers, Emad
Salam, who offered to sabotage the bomb. The
FBI told him “no.” The so-called “hot bed” of
white separatism at Elohim City, occasional home
to Tim McVeigh in the weeks prior to the OK
City bombing, was founded and is being run by an
FBI informant! And nobody has ever really
explained what this second Ryder truck was doing
in a secret camp half way from Elohim City to
Oklahoma City two weeks before the bombing.
So, here we are today. Like the Romans of
Crassus’ and Cicero’s time, or the Germans under
a newly elected Hitler, we are being warned that a
dangerous enemy threatens us, implacable,
invisible, omnipresent, and invulnerable as long as
our government is hamstrung by that silly old Bill
of Rights. Already there have appeared articles
debating whether or not “extraordinary measures”
(i.e., torture) are not fully justified under certain
circumstances such as those we are purported to
face.
As was the case in Rome and Germany, the
government continues to plead with the public for
an expansion of its power and authority, to “deal
with the crisis.” However, as Casio watch timers
are paraded before the cameras, to the stentorian
tones of the talking heads’ constant dire warnings,
it is legitimate to question just how real the
cris[i]s is, and how much is the result of political
machinations by our own leaders. Are the
terrorists really a threat, or just hired actors with
bombs and Casio watches, paid for by Cicero and
given brown shirts to wear by Hitler?
Is terrorism inside the United States really
from outside, or is it a stage managed production,
designed to cause Americans to believe they have
no choice but to surrender the Republic and
accept the totalitarian rule of a new emperor, or a
new Fuhrer? Once lost, the Romans never got
their Republic back. Once lost, the Germans
never got their Republic back. In both cases, the
nation had to totally collapse before freedom was
restored to the people.
Remember that when Crassus tells you that
Sparticus approaches. Remember that when thugs
in the streets act in a manner clearly designed to
865

David Allen Rivera, Final Warning: A History of the New World Order

provoke the public fear. Remember that when the
Reichstag burns down.
Source
Available at http://www.whatreallyhappened.com/
ARTICLE5/. © Michael Rivero. All rights
reserved.

David Allen Rivera, Final Warning:
A History of the New World Order (1997)
David Allen Rivera is the author of the 400-page
alternative history, Final Warning: A History of the
New World Order. In the conclusion he brings the
story up-to-date, revisiting the older John Birch
Society prophecies of a New World Order in terms
of the recent moves toward globalization of the
world’s economy. A fascinating aspect of such items
is that they offered a robust, conspiratorial critique
of globalist tendencies such as NAFTA (North
American Free-Trade Agreement) and the WTO
(World Trade Organization) long before the recent
anticapitalist movement latched on to these targets.
Even though the Illuminati ceased to exist as an
organization in the 1790’s, the organization’s
leaders kept the conspiracy alive, and continued
working towards their goal of a one world socialist
government. Since then, as you have read, various
organizations have been established to perpetuate
these goals, but the term “Illuminati” continues to
be used as the name for the engineers of this
Master Conspiracy, since it is more recognizable
than the various secret, and little known
organizations that are carrying out this Satanic
plot. It is believed, that at the pinnacle of the
Illuminati, is a group of nine men, who, for the
most part are the descendants of the original
Illuminati conspirators. It has been reported that
they met on June 12, 1952 in France, at the
Castle of Arginy (which is where Hugues de
Paynes founded the Knights Templar in 1118),
under the name “Order of the Temple,” to set
their final plans in motion for the establishment of
a one-world government; also on March 21, 1981,
in Switzerland, in a mansion once owned by the
Order of the Knights of Malta; then again in
866

France, 1984, as the “International Order of
Chivalry, Solar Tradition.”
In October, 1977, the John Birch Society
printed a secret report retrieved from the office
of C. (Clarence) Douglas Dillon (CFR member,
head of Dillon, Read and Company, former
Chairman of the Rockefeller Foundation, and
former Secretary of the Treasury under Kennedy
and Johnson) that indicated that the Illuminati
had hoped to establish a new World Order by
1976, but by 1970, the date appeared to be
impractical, and a new agenda was drawn up,
which had required about 15 years for
completion. However, 1985 came without their
goals being realized.
The sweeping social reforms of the past,
brought us the Social Security and Welfare
system, and now the move is on for a National
Health Care program. On April 18, 1994, the
Associated Press reported that Sen. Jay
Rockefeller (WV) said: “We’re going to push
through health care reform regardless of the
views of the American people.” This is all part of
the Master Plan, because it is the ultimate goal of
the Illuminati, for the American citizen to
eventually be totally dependent upon the
government for their security, food, electricity,
heat, clothing, and other necessities. Once that
potential exists, One-World Government is right
around the corner.
Slowly our country is being globalized, to fit
into the world marketplace. [ . . .] The economy of
the United States, which has been allowed to
erode for years, is now experiencing what may be
the final assault. The North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA), is a two-volume document,
nearly 1,100 pages in length, which incorporates
most of the provisions of the 1988 Canadian Free
Trade Agreement, and makes the United States,
Canada, and Mexico unequal partners in trade.
On December 31, 1988, President Ronald Reagan
signed Executive Order # 12662 which said, that
regardless of the constitutionality of decisions
made by the bi-national committees of the CFTA,
the United States had to accept it. When NAFTA
was approved by Congress, more of our national

David Allen Rivera, Final Warning: A History of the New World Order

sovereignty was given up to Mexico. Since
Mexican workers do not have minimum wage
protection and do not have the right to bargain
collectively, the agreement has made Mexico
fertile territory for American companies to
relocate, thus creating the probability of a huge
loss of American jobs, and the exploitation of the
Mexican workforce. That is only part of the
inequities that are contained in this agreement.
Since the inception of NAFTA, some of the
early results, were that net exports to Mexico had
fallen by nearly $500 million, our trade surplus
with Mexico had been cut in half, more than 230
companies had moved to Mexico, and there had
been a tremendous increase in America’s
investment in Mexico. While the Clinton
Administration reported that 127,000 jobs were
created by NAFTA, what they didn’t reveal, was
that a report by the Joint Economic Committee of
Congress indicated that the nation had lost
137,000 jobs. During the first nine months of
1994, our trade surplus with Mexico shrunk by 27
percent. This report further said that this was
“only the tip of the job displacement iceberg.”
According to Rep. Marcy Kaptur (Democrat from
Ohio), NAFTA promoters said that 60,000
American manufactured cars would be exported
to Mexico in 1994, but only 28,000 were. Not only
that, we ended up importing 278,000 cars from
Mexico. The highly skilled, well-paying positions
have gone to Mexico, while low-paying, lowskilled jobs have been created in the United
States. This stems from the fact that the raw
materials and parts are exported to Mexico,
assembled, then imported back into the country at
a far greater value. Rep. Peter DeFazio
(Democrat from Oregon) said: “There’s also a
conspiracy of silence on the part of the
Republican leadership in Congress who provided
the votes needed to pass this turkey.” At the 1994
Summit of the Americas in Miami (FL), Clinton
spoke about bringing South America into NAFTA,
and Chile became the first nation to join. Mattel,
the toy manufacturing giant, said that NAFTA
would create more American jobs, yet the Public
Citizen’s Global Trade Watch reported that they

laid off 520 workers at their Medina, New York
facility. The report further stated that “As of midAugust 1995, the Department of Labor had
certified 38,148 workers as having lost their jobs
to NAFTA.”
In 1848, Karl Marx said: “Free trade breaks up
old nationalities . . . in a word, the free trade
system hastens social revolution.” Henry Kissinger
said that NAFTA represented “the most creative
step toward a New World Order.”
The move to establish the World Trade
Organization (WTO) in Geneva, Switzerland, was
initiated during the Uruguay round of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT,
an instrument of the United Nations). It is a
descendant of the International Trade
Organization (ITO), and the Organization for
Trade Cooperation (OTC), which had been
proposed during the 1940’s and 1950’s. At that
time, the country and the Congress was not ready
to have their economic authority transferred to
international control. In 1958, Sen. George
Malone of Nevada said: “The global theory of free
trade is siphoning off America’s wealth and
bringing her economy to the level of others. The
theory is displacing American workers who
otherwise would be employed.” Now, the
International Bankers believe they can do it.
GATT is a document consisting of 22,000 pages of
information, tariff schedules, rules and
regulations; and 650 pages of enabling legislation.
Based on its size, how many of our legislators do
you think read every word of this trade
agreement. And based on its complexity, if it was
read—was it understood? GATT is the only
international agreement which sets rules for world
trade, and provides for the mediation of disputes,
which is argued by many to be the best way to
open up foreign markets to U.S. exports, because
protectionist countries, as well as the U.S.
(producing a loss in revenue) would have to lower
their tariffs, to create an even playing field.
However, critics familiar with its contents say that
it will succeed in seriously damaging our national
sovereignty and independence. Proponents
disagree, saying that any country can withdraw
867

Bill Clinton, “Remarks by the President in Apology for Study Done in Tuskegee”

from membership after giving a six month notice.
As one of the 123 member nations, the United
States would only have one vote, yet it would have
to pay nearly 25% of the cost. GATT would have
the power to force Congress to change laws by
declaring them to be “protectionist” (WTO
Charter, Article 16, Section 4), and if we don’t
comply, we would be subject to trade sanctions.
[ . . .]
Right now, the world is a volatile place—
hostilities in foreign countries are threatening, the
world economy is teetering, and democracy hangs
in the balance, as a handful of men patiently wait
for a few more pieces of the puzzle to fall into
place, so they can spring their trap.
Source
Available at http://www.viewfromthewall.com/
© David Allen Rivera. All rights reserved.

Bill Clinton, “Remarks by the President in
Apology for Study Done in Tuskegee” (1997)
Between 1932 and 1972, more than 400 black men
with syphilis were told they had “bad blood” at
Alabama’s Tuskegee Institute but were not given
treatment even after a cure became available.
Instead, they were studied by the U.S. Public
Health Service and later by the Centers for Disease
Control to observe the long-term effects of syphilis.
Some Americans, making comparisons with the
AIDS epidemic, have suggested that this case
proves that it is not inconceivable that the U.S.
government has carried out covert policies of genocide against African Americans. The following
extract is taken from President Clinton’s public
apology for the Tuskegee experiment.
THE PRESIDENT : Ladies and gentlemen, on
Sunday, Mr. Shaw will celebrate his ninety-fifth
birthday.
(applause)
I would like to recognize the other survivors
who are here today and their families: Mr. Charlie
Pollard is here.
(applause)
Mr. Carter Howard.
868

(applause)
Mr. Fred Simmons.
(applause)
Mr. Simmons just took his first airplane ride,
and he reckons he’s about a hundred and ten
years old, so I think it’s time for him to take a
chance or two.
(laughter)
I’m glad he did. And Mr. Frederick Moss,
thank you, sir. . . .
(applause)
The eight men who are survivors of the syphilis
study at Tuskegee are a living link to a time not so
very long ago that many Americans would prefer
not to remember, but we dare not forget. It was a
time when our nation failed to live up to its ideals,
when our nation broke the trust with our people
that is the very foundation of our democracy. It is
not only in remembering that shameful past that
we can make amends and repair our nation, but it
is in remembering that past that we can build a
better present and a better future. And without
remembering it, we cannot make amends and we
cannot go forward.
So America does remember the hundreds of
men used in research without their knowledge
and consent. We remember them and their family
members. Men who were poor and AfricanAmerican, without resources and with few
alternatives, they believed they had found hope
when they were offered free medical care by the
United States Public Health Service. They were
betrayed.
Medical people are supposed to help when we
need care, but even once a cure was discovered,
they were denied help, and they were lied to by
our government. Our government is supposed to
protect the rights of its citizens; their rights were
trampled on. Forty years, hundreds of men
betrayed, along with their wives and children,
along with the community in Macon County,
Alabama, the City of Tuskegee, the fine university
there, and the larger African-American
community.
The United States government did something
that was wrong—deeply, profoundly, morally

Agent Orange, “Operation Paperclip Casefile”

wrong. It was an outrage to our commitment to
integrity and equality for all our citizens.
To the survivors, to the wives and family
members, the children and the grandchildren, I
say what you know: No power on Earth can give
you back the lives lost, the pain suffered, the years
of internal torment and anguish. What was done
cannot be undone. But we can end the silence.
We can stop turning our heads away. We can look
at you in the eye and finally say on behalf of the
American people, what the United States
government did was shameful, and I am sorry.
(applause)
The American people are sorry—for the loss,
for the years of hurt. You did nothing wrong, but
you were grievously wronged. I apologize and I
am sorry that this apology has been so long in
coming. . . .
(applause)
. . . We face a challenge in our time. Science
and technology are rapidly changing our lives with
the promise of making us much healthier, much
more productive and more prosperous. But with
these changes we must work harder to see that as
we advance we don’t leave behind our conscience.
No ground is gained and, indeed, much is lost if
we lose our moral bearings in the name of
progress.
The people who ran the study at Tuskegee
diminished the stature of man by abandoning the
most basic ethical precepts. They forgot their
pledge to heal and repair. They had the power to
heal the survivors and all the others and they did
not. Today, all we can do is apologize. But you
have the power, for only you—Mr. Shaw, the
others who are here, the family members who are
with us in Tuskegee—only you have the power to
forgive. Your presence here shows us that you
have chosen a better path than your government
did so long ago. You have not withheld the power
to forgive. I hope today and tomorrow every
American will remember your lesson and live by it.
Thank you, and God bless you.
Source
This selection available at http://www.
GrandConspiracy.com/transcript-tuskegee.html.

Full text of Clinton’s speech available at
http://clinton4.nara.gov/textonly/New/Remarks/
Fri/19970516-898.html.

Agent Orange, “Operation
Paperclip Casefile” (1997)
Compiled by someone who called himself Agent
Orange and posted to various Internet newsgroups,
this casefile weaves together some of the known
facts about Operation PAPERCLIP with many of the
most popular postwar conspiracy theories. Operation PAPERCLIP was the American government’s program at the end of World War II to bring to the
United States a number of German intelligence
officers and scientists, particularly those connected
with the Nazis’ rocket development program.
After WWII ended in 1945, victorious Russian
and American intelligence teams began a treasure
hunt throughout occupied Germany for military
and scientific booty. They were looking for things
like new rocket and aircraft designs, medicines,
and electronics. But they were also hunting down
the most precious “spoils” of all: the scientists
whose work had nearly won the war for Germany.
The engineers and intelligence officers of the
Nazi War Machine.
The U.S. Military rounded up Nazi scientists
and brought them to America. It had originally
intended merely to debrief them and send them
back to Germany. But when it realized the extent
of the scientists knowledge and expertise, the War
Department decided it would be a waste to send
the scientists home. Following the discovery of
flying discs (foo fighters), particle/laser beam
weaponry in German military bases, the War
Department decided that NASA and the CIA
must control this technology, and the Nazi
engineers that had worked on this technology.
There was only one problem: it was illegal. U.S.
law explicitly prohibited Nazi officials from
immigrating to America—and as many as threequarters of the scientists in question had been
committed Nazis. [ . . .]
869

Agent Orange, “Operation Paperclip Casefile”

Military Intelligence “cleansed” the files of
Nazi references. By 1955, more than 760 German
scientists had been granted citizenship in the U.S.
and given prominent positions in the American
scientific community. Many had been longtime
members of the Nazi party and the Gestapo, had
conducted experiments on humans at
concentration camps, had used slave labor, and
had comitted other war crimes. [ . . .]
HEINRICH RUPP
Some of Rupp’s best work was done for the
CIA, after he was imported in Operation
Paperclip. Rupp has been convicted of bank
fraud. He was an operative for the CIA and is
deeply involved in the Savings and Loan scandals.
A federal jury has indicated they believe
testimony that Rupp, the late CIA Director
William Casey—then Reagan’s campaign
manager, and Donald Gregg, now U.S.
Ambassador to South Korea, flew with George
Bush to Paris in 1980, during the election in
which Bush was on the ticket with Ronald
Reagan. The testimony states that three meetings
were held on October 19 and 20 at the Hotel
Florida and Hotel Crillion. The subject?
According to the court testimony, the meetings
were to sabotage President Jimmy Carter’s
reelection campaign by delaying the release of
American hostages in Iran. The hostages were
released on January 20, 1981, right after Reagan
and Bush were sworn into office. Iran was
promised return of its frozen assets in the United
States and the foundation for the Iran-Contra deal
was set into motion.
LICIO GELLI
Head of a 2400 member secret Masonic Lodge,
P2, a neo-fascist organization, in Italy that catered
to only the elite, Gelli had high connections in the
Vatican, even though he was not a Catholic. P2’s
membership is totally secret and not even
available to its Mother Lodge in England. Gelli
was responsible for providing Argentina with the
Exocet missile. He was a double agent for the
CIA and the KGB. He assisted many former Nazi
high officials in their escape from Europe to

870

Central America. He had close ties with the
Italian Mafia. Gelli was a close associate of Benito
Mussolini. He was also closely affiliated with
Roberto Calvi, head of the scandal-ridden Vatican
Bank. Calvi was murdered. Gelli’s secret lodge
consisted of extremely important people,
including armed forces commanders, secret
service chiefs, head of Italy’s financial police, 30
generals, eight admirals, newspaper editors,
television and top business executives and key
bankers—including Calvi. Licio Gelli and others
in P2 were behind the assasination of Pope John
Paul 1.
The central figure in Europe and South
America that linked the CIA, Masonic Lodge,
Vatican, ex-Nazis and several South American
governments, the Italian government and several
international banks was Licio Gelli. He, with
Klaus Barbie and Heinrich Rupp, met with
Ronald R. Rewald in Uruguay to arrange for the
Argentine purchase of the French-made Exocet
missile, used in the Falkland Island attack to kill
British soldiers. [ . . .]
Gelli and his P–2 lodge had staggering
connections to banking, intelligence and
diplomatic passports. The CIA poured hundreds
of millions of dollars into Italy in the form of
secret subsidies for political parties, labor unions
and communications businesses. At the same time
the Agency continued its relationship with farright and violent elements as a back-up should a
coup be needed to oust a possible Communist
government. This covert financing was exposed by
the Prime Minister of Italy in a speech to
Parliament. He indicates that more than 600
people in Italy still remain on the payroll of the
CIA. Licio Gelli was an ardent Nazi and a perfect
asset of the CIA. As part of Reinhard Gehlen’s
intelligence team, he had excellent contacts. Licio
was the go between for the CIA and the Vatican
through his P2 Lodge.
Project Paperclip was stopped in 1957, when
West Germany protested to the U.S. that these
efforts had stripped it of “scientific skills.” There
was no comment about supporting Nazis.

Lawrence Teeter, “Statement on the 30th Anniversary of Robert Kennedy’s Assassination”

Paperclip may have ended in 1957, but as you
can see from Licio Gelli and his international
dealings with the CIA in Italy/P2, and Heinrich
Rupp with his involvement in October Surprise,
the ramifications of Paperclip are world-wide.
The Nazis became employed CIA agents,
engaging in clandestine work with the likes of
George Bush, the CIA, Henry Kissenger, and the
Masonic P2 lodge. This is but one of the results
of Operation Paperclip. Another umbrella project
that was spawned from Paperclip was MKULTRA. [ . . .]
Project Paperclip brought us MK-ULTRA.
Paperclip ultimately brought in key players
involved in the Assassination of Pope 1, October
Surprise (sabotage of Carter’s peace talks), and a
great many other things still classified to this day.
The results of Project Paperclip were devastating,
and very far reaching. I guess that is what you
would expect from collaborating with Nazis.
This research shows that the OSS/CIA that was
formed in the National Security Act, the same
agency that employed hundreds of Nazis, has
been in alliance with the Vatican through various
Agency connections such as Licio Gelli. The
CIA/Vatican alliance that assassinated Pope John
Paul 1, JFK, and hundreds of dictators of 3rd
world countries is the Illuminati.
The Bavarian Illuminati has been around for
centuries in one way or another. It’s presence in
the 20th century is the direct result of the Nazis.
The Nazi connections to the occult and the
Bavarian Thule Society were parallel to the
American members of 33rd degree Freemasonry.
When the Operation Paperclip was successfully
executed, the Nazi element of the Bavarian Thule
society was fused with the American members of
Freemasonry to create the Illuminati.
Operation Paperclip, MK-ULTRA, October
Surprise, and George Bush are all facets of the
Illuminati, a group whose ideals are rooted in the
occult, and dedicated to world domination.
Source
Available at http://www.mt.net/~watcher/
nwonazi.html.

Lawrence Teeter, “Statement on the
30th Anniversary of Robert Kennedy’s
Assassination” (1998)
The following statement was issued by Sirhan
Sirhan’s lawyer, Lawrence Teeter, on the thirtieth
anniversary of the assassination of Robert Kennedy.
Although Sirhan was tried and convicted, in 1998
Teeter put forward the case that his client was not
guilty of the murder, and should be retried.
The assassination of Senator Robert F. Kennedy
shortly after midnight on June 5, 1968, changed
the course of world history. Senator Kennedy had
promised to end the war in Vietnam if elected as
President, as seemed likely to happen following
his victory in the June 4 California Democratic
Presidential primary election.
At first glance, the RFK case seems open and
shut. After all, Sirhan Sirhan was arrested with a
gun in hand at the scene. There the simplicity
ends, however. There is an abundance of evidence
which refutes the official version of this crime.
1. Sirhan was out of position and out of range
and therefore could not have shot Robert
Kennedy. The Senator was shot from behind, but
all witnesses place Sirhan in front of him in a
face-to-face position. All witnesses placed Sirhan’s
gun at between 1.5 and 5 feet from Senator
Kennedy, but the autopsy findings clearly
establish that the Senator was shot from a weapon
held somewhere between less than 1 inch and no
more than three inches away. All witnesses
describe Sirhan’s gun as having been held
horizontally in a normal standing position, but the
autopsy report describes all bullet tracks in
Senator Kennedy’s body as angled sharply
upward, as though fired from below.
2. An armed security guard with strong antiKennedy views admitted that he was standing
directly in contact with the Senator to the rear,
that he dropped down when the shooting began
and that he then pulled his gun. One witness
ignored by police claimed he saw the guard fire.
The guard’s weapon was never checked.
Meanwhile, the one person who photographed

871

Rosenberg Sons’ Statement on the Forty-Fifth Anniversary of Their Parents’ Execution

the assassination, Jamie Scott Enyart, was tackled
and arrested at gun point. His camera was seized
by police, and his photographs have never been
recovered. Los Angeles Police secretly burned
2,410 assassination-related photographs in a
county hospital incinerator long before Sirhan’s
trial. A Los Angeles jury later awarded Enyart a
substantial verdict for the loss of his photographs.
3. The official autopsy report devastates the
prosecution theory that Sirhan shot Robert
Kennedy. However, prosecutors illegally withheld
this critical document from defense counsel for
four months until after the defense had
unnecessarily conceded Sirhan’s identity as the
killer during opening statements to the jury.
4. Bullet holes in a door frame at the crime
scene which are documented in FBI photographs
show that more bullets were fired than could have
come from “Sirhan’s” gun. The police never
disclosed these bullets, even though their removal
by LAPD criminalists was observed by other
police personnel. The door frame in question was
then destroyed under cover of a court order
issued immediately after Sirhan’s trial without
notice to the defense.
5. Police switched bullets in order to fabricate
evidence lending apparent support to their theory
of the case. As has been noted by Sirhan case
researcher Lynn Mangan, Los Angeles police
manufactured a comparison photomicrograph
using substitute victim bullets and then falsely
presented this photograph as evidencing a match
between the bullet removed from Senator
Kennedy’s neck and a test bullet fired from
“Sirhan’s” gun. The use of substitute bullets in this
exhibit (Special Exhibit 10) is clear from the fact
that identifying markings on the bases of the
involved bullets differ from those recorded by
physicians when the bullets were recovered.
6. Police behaved as though two guns were
recovered at the crime scene, because they fired
two revolvers and obtained test bullets from both
weapons. The second gun had been in LAPD
custody before the assassination. Despite police
denials, official records confirm that this gun was
destroyed by the LAPD long before Sirhan’s trial.
872

7. Dr. Herbert Spiegel, a New York psychiatrist
who teaches at Columbia University and who is
widely regarded as among the country’s leading
experts on hypnosis, has concluded that Sirhan was
probably acting out hypnotic commands when he
fired a gun in Senator Kennedy’s presence that
fateful day. Sirhan himself was so disoriented
following his arrest that he did not even know he
had yet to be arraigned. During pre-trial psychiatric
examinations in his cell, Sirhan proved to be the
ideal hypnotic subject, climbing the bars without
knowing that he was carrying out post-hypnotic
commands. Expert trial testimony established that
notebook passages containing repetitions of the
phrase “RFK Must Die” were written in a hypnotic
trance, and Sirhan spontaneously reproduced this
phrase under hypnosis when asked in his cell for a
description of the Senator. Sirhan’s amnesia about
the crime was unshaken by hypnosis and has
consistently remained intact.
These and other issues of constitutional
dimension are currently before the California
Supreme Court, which is considering a habeas
corpus petition seeking an evidentiary hearing and a
new trial for Sirhan. Meanwhile, this historic crime
remains unsolved. Its true perpetrators have never
been brought to justice. One victim was killed, and
five others were wounded. The seventh victim of
this dastardly plot, Sirhan Sirhan, has been confined
to thirty years for a crime he did not commit.
Source
Available at http://www.webcom.com/~lpease/
collections/assassinations/teeter.htm.

Rosenberg Sons’ Statement on the
Forty-Fifth Anniversary of Their
Parents’ Execution (1998)
Michael and Robert Meeropol, the two sons of
Ethel and Julius Rosenberg, who were six and ten
at the time of their parents’ executions, continue to
maintain the innocence of their parents, arguing
that the recently released VENONA files of intercepted Soviet signals do not necessarily prove their
guilt. Instead, they insist the Rosenbergs were the
victims of a government frame-up.

Rosenberg Sons’ Statement on the Forty-Fifth Anniversary of Their Parents’ Execution

We have been convinced for decades that our
parents did not conspire to steal the secret of the
Atomic Bomb. Over the past several years, newly
released government documents and statements by
government agents prove we were correct. Now, on
the 45th anniversary of our parents’ death, we call
for the US Government to acknowledge that our
parents’ execution was not justified, and admit that
our parents were executed for a crime the
Government knew they did not commit.
How did the Government justify our parents’
execution 45 years ago?
After our parents’ arrest, FBI Director J. Edgar
Hoover said they committed “the crime of the
century.”
The Government’s prosecutor at trial said our
parents helped steal the secret of the Atomic
Bomb, “the most important scientific secret ever
known to mankind.”
The Judge justified the death sentence by
asserting that “putting into the hands of the
Russians the A-bomb years before our best
scientists predicted Russia would perfect the
bomb has already caused . . . the Communist
aggression in Korea, with resulting casualties
exceeding fifty thousand.”
President Eisenhower denied clemency
because their actions might have condemned
millions to death in a future nuclear war and
wrote that he would not halt our mother’s
execution because “she is obviously the leader in
everything they did in the spy ring.”
But as the following ten points will
demonstrate, all of this is false. Though we cannot
vouch for the accuracy of the following
documents, the Government does:
1. The Government endorses the veracity of the
National Security Agency’s (NSA) VENONA
transcriptions which state that Ethel Rosenberg
was not an espionage agent.
2. The NSA states that the FBI had this
information in its hands before Ethel Rosenberg
was arrested.
3. FBI documents indicated that Ethel
Rosenberg was arrested to use “as a lever” to
force cooperation from our father.

4. When Eisenhower was briefed on the case
after being inaugurated in 1953, the FBI
recommended against clemency for our mother,
not because of any activities on her part, but
because she was “cognizant of her husband’s
activity” and was “uncooperative.”
5. Just weeks before our parents’ execution
[and after the briefing of Eisenhower described
above], the FBI drafted questions to ask our
father should he agree to cooperate in exchange
for his life. The sixth question read, “Was your
wife cognizant of your espionage activities.”
6. Meredith Gardner, the man credited with
breaking the Soviet code that created the
VENONA transcriptions, recently stated that he
was shaken by our mother’s execution because he
knew from the material he worked with that she
was not a spy.
7. General Leslie Groves, military chief of the
atomic bomb project, admitted to the Atomic
Energy Commission: “I think the data that went
out in the case of the Rosenbergs was of minor
value.”
8. Justice Department attorneys would not
contest the accuracy of the top atomic scientists’
sworn affidavits. The scientists swore that the
material prosecution witnesses at our parents’ trial
testified they conspired to steal “was too
incomplete, ambiguous and even incorrect to be
of any service or value to the Russians in
shortening the time required to develop their
nuclear bombs.” (Dr. Henry Linschitz)
9. In the FBI briefing materials for President
Eisenhower they recommended against clemency
for Julius Rosenberg not because he stole atomic
secrets, but because they claimed he was
extensively involved in industrial espionage.
10. The VENONA transcriptions show the spy
the government claims was our father knew little
about the Atomic Bomb project and was, instead,
involved in industrial espionage.
Do not misread us. The NSA and FBI have not
proven that Julius Rosenberg was involved in
industrial espionage, any more than General
Groves’ statement proved that anything “went out
in the case of the Rosenbergs.” We are presenting
873

Mark E. Willey, “Pearl Harbor: Mother of All Conspiracies”

US Government material, not endorsing it. But
this material amounts to the Government’s
admission that FBI officials and agents,
government prosecutors, and others, knowingly,
willfully, and with malice aforethought
manipulated the judicial process to execute two
people for a crime they did not commit. The
Government stands behind the accuracy of
documents that lead inexorably to this conclusion.
It is past time for it to take responsibility for its
misdeeds.
Michael and Robert Meeropol
Springfield, MA USA
Source
Available at http://www.webcom.com/~lpease/
collections/disputes/rosen-sons-press98.htm.

Mark E. Willey, “Pearl Harbor:
Mother of All Conspiracies” (2000)
This extract, taken from Mark Willey’s book on
Pearl Harbor, argues that Roosevelt knew in
advance about the Japanese attack and subsequently engaged in a massive cover-up.
The US was warned by, at least, the
governments of Britain, Netherlands, Australia,
Peru, Korea and the Soviet Union that a surprise
attack on Pearl Harbor was coming. Most, if not all,
Japanese codes were broken. FDR and Marshall
and others knew the attack was coming, allowed it
and covered up their knowledge. It’s significant
that both the chief of OP–20—G Safford and
Friedman of Army SIS, the two people in the
world that knew what we decoded, said that FDR
knew Pearl Harbor was going to be attacked.
Pearl Harbor was not about war with Japan—It
was about war with GERMANY. Hitler would
not declare war if U.S. unbeatable. 1. Objective:
War with Germany. How do you bait Hitler to
declare war on you? You don’t get it by looking
unbeatable! 2. Direct provocation in Atlantic had
failed—Hitler didn’t bite. 3. FDR knew from
magic that if Japan attacked, Germany would
declare war. 4. Therefore: the problem was how
874

to maneuver Japan into firing the first shot or
make the first overt act. 5. Japan must succeed or
Hitler would renege.
War with Japan was a given because they had to
attack the Philippines. If Japan’s fleet were
destroyed, it would defeat the purpose. It would
have been obvious suicide for Hitler to declare
war if Japan were crippled—it would allow the US
to attack him without even the possibility of a
two-front war. That was what he had just been
avoiding for months. The plan could only work if
Japan’s attack succeeded. The lure of a weakened
US in a two-front war focused on Japan seemed to
make a German war declaration cost-free. But it
was all a trap—FDR was always going to ignore
Japan and go after Hitler, for his ultimate goal was
to save his beloved Soviet Communism.
In November FDR ordered the Red Cross
Disaster Relief director to secretly prepare for
massive casualties at Pearl Harbor because he was
going to let it be attacked. When he protested to
the President, President Roosevelt told him that
“the American people would never agree to enter
the war in Europe unless they were attack [sic]
within their own borders.” [ . . .]
J. Edgar Hoover told his friends in early 1942
that FDR had known about the Pearl Harbor plan
since the early fall. It was totally in character for
FDR to concoct such a plan. Not only had the US
Senate already censured FDR for utterly lacking
moral perspective, but as Walter Lippmann wrote:
“his purposes are not simple and his methods are
not direct.” To get into the war, FDR used the
Atlantic Fleet as bait to be shot up; Pearl Harbor
was the same thing in the Pacific. US Admiral
Bloch testified “The Japanese only destroyed a lot
of old hardware. In a sense they did us a favor.”
This was obviously FDR’s view as well, because
on 7 December at 2:15, minutes after hearing of
the attack and before any damage reports were in,
FDR called Lord Halifax at the British Embassy
and told him “Most of the fleet was at sea . . .
none of their newer ships were in harbour.”
COVERUP BY SECRECY.
Why does the government refuse to release all
the messages to the attack fleet, or any JN–25

Michael C. Ruppert, “Statement at unansweredquestions.org Press Conference”

messages decoded before Dec 7? There is
absolutely nothing about national security to hide
in JN–25. It is a trivial and worthless 19th century
code. The techniques for cracking it had been
published world-wide in 1931. The US
government has proudly showed how they used
JN–25 decrypts after December 8 to win the
Battle of Midway which occurred 7 months after
Pearl Harbor. Therefore, there is nothing intrinsic
about the code itself, the means of cracking it, or
the fact that we cracked it, that has any national
security implications of any nature. What is the
difference between decrypts from the Purple
machine and decrypts from JN–25? The answer is
simply that the JN–25 messages contained the
final operational details of the Pearl Harbor
attack, whereas the Purple did not.
WHAT ARE THEY HIDING?
Why won’t they let the truth out? Such secrecy
breeds mistrust in government. The only thing
that is left to hide are JN–25 decrypts and
worksheets showing that the US and Britain
monitored the Japanese attack fleet all the way to
Pearl Harbor. That is the scandal. That is the big
secret. It raises the issue of whether the NSA is
accessory after the fact to treason. However, the
secrecy and misdirection by the NSA about our
capabilities with JN–25B and pre-war messages
proves there is something very wrong. The NSA
has systematically lied about the size of the JN25
books by a factor of 4 and about how many
codebreakers worked on the code in 1941 by a
factor of 22. The NSA is an evil Gestapo that is
committed neither to truth nor open government
nor the rule of law. We live an Orwellian history
in which treason is honored, in which FDR’s
murder of thousands of young innocent men is
good. In a word, we are no different from the
tyranny we decry. A self-governing people must
have truth to make proper decisions. By
subverting the truth, the National Security
Agency is subverting our Democracy.
[ . . .]
FDR was a traitor for maneuvering Japan into
war with US—and that is known and admitted—
FDR was a traitor for sacrificing American lives,

for putting America in danger, for usurping the
Constitutional power of Congress to make war.
Day of infamy, indeed; he chose his words
precisely with a hidden double-meaning. Four
days before the attack, FDR could have sent
telegrams of condolence to the families of the
sailors he was going to allow to be killed. Even
today there is a coverup, based on a transparently
bogus excuse of national security, that shows that
our government cannot face the truth about what
happened a half-century ago. Truth we owe the
men of Pearl Harbor. Until we tell the full truth,
we dishonor them and every soldier and sailor
who gave their life for their country. Should their
lives have been sacrificed for treason and no one
know, they had died in vain. If their honor cover
treason—we are not a nation of law. The Air
Corps in the Philippines and the Navy at Pearl
were FDR’s bait, the oil embargo was his stick,
the end of negotiations was the tripwire in FDR’s
game of shame—a game of death for so many.
Roosevelt aided and abetted the murder of
thousands of Americans.
Source
Willey, Mark Emerson. 2000. Pearl Harbor: Mother
of All Conspiracies. Philadelphia: Xlibris.
Available at http://www.geocities.com/mark_
willey/pearl.html. © Mark Willey. All rights
reserved.

Michael C. Ruppert, “Statement at
unansweredquestions.org Press
Conference” (10 June 2002)
Michael Ruppert, former Los Angeles Police
Department detective and investigator of the
alleged CIA invovlement in spreading crack
cocaine in inner cities, is one of the most outspoken
proponents of a conspiratorial view of the terrorist
attacks of 11 September 2001. In particular he has
received much publicity for his detailed “timeline”
of events leading up to the attacks. In this press
statement, Ruppert outlines his case that the Bush
administration knew in advance of the attacks, and
offers a list of unanswered questions.
875

Michael C. Ruppert, “Statement at unansweredquestions.org Press Conference”

Just a few short years ago the world was
accustomed to not learning the real historical
truth about an event for many decades and
perhaps centuries. But since Sept. 11th the
Internet, and an increasingly skeptical world
population, have dramatically shortened history’s
learning curve.
Rather than relying on unsupported theory, it is
possible to expose and focus attention on major
discrepancies in the Bush administration’s
characterization and handling of events by using
the internet as a vehicle to widely disseminate and
analyze reports from respected mainstream media
from all over the world and to then compare and
contrast those reports with official government
statements, official records and other
unquestionable documents and undisputed
conduct.
In this manner it is possible, for example, to
establish that statements by President Bush, Ari
Fleischer and National Security Advisor
Condoleezza Rice claiming they had absolutely no
idea that aircraft would be used as weapons, are
absolutely false.
[ . . .] It becomes clear that foreign intelligence
services—not random callers or anonymous
tipsters—were making direct and urgent
pleadings to U.S. intelligence agencies that, when
compared side-by-side, clearly establish that Al
Qaeda had trained as many as 25 suicide pilots
who were planning to crash hijacked airliners into
the World Trade Center in the week of
September 9th.
Is that specific enough?
Are we to assume that a direct warning from
Russian President Putin to the highest levels of
the U.S. government somehow fell through the
cracks?
The U.S. government has not denied a single
one of these press reports. Neither have any of
the intelligence services mentioned. In light of
what the world has now seen was done with
reports of possible hijackings from the FBI in
Arizona and Minnesota, and the utterly
disingenuous and unpersuasive profferings of the
administration and its managers, we are now
876

being asked to believe in some kind of grand and
colossally contagious incompetence that any
sentient being is not capable of.
[ . . .]
The Bush Administration must be forced to
admit that they knew hijacked planes were going
to be used as weapons. Why else would terrorists
take flight training lessons? You can’t crop dust
with a 757 that you don’t know how to land or
take-off.
Why else would the G-8 conference in Genoa
less than a year earlier have had extensive
preparations to prevent hijacked aircraft from
being used as weapons. President Bush was there,
surrounded by anti-aircraft weapons. Was he not
briefed on it?
Just a few of the questions that MUST be
answered are going to be discussed today and we
have been asking them at From The Wilderness
since September 12th. Now many more are
asking:
- Why did U.S. State Department officials Karl
Inderfurth, Tom Simmons and Lee Coldren travel
to Berlin in July 2001 to tell the Taliban that the
U.S. government was going to “bury them in a
carpet of bombs” in October 2001?
- Why were no fighters scrambled for 50
minutes after the first two planes had hit the
World Trade Center towers?
- Why did Andrews Air Force Base alter its web
site on 9-13 to hide the fact that it had scrambleready fighters?
- Why were massive numbers of U.S., British
and NATO forces pre-positioned off the Pakistani
coast, in Oman and Egypt before the 9-11
attacks?
- Why has no one forcefully demanded an
explanation from the administration as to why the
head of the Pakistani intelligence service, the ISI,
wired $100,000 to Mohammed Atta before the
attacks and then was happily in Washington, D.C.
meeting with the heads of the House and Senate
Intelligence Committees on September 11th?
- Why has the Wall Street Journal or any other
major paper not investigated the fact that the aide
to the head of the ISI who wired the money to

Ether Zone, “Clinton Body Count”

Atta, Ahamad Umar Sheik, is also the lead suspect
in the murder of reporter Daniel Pearl?
- Why did the National Security Council
convene a Dabhol working group in the summer
of 2001 to help a beleaguered Enron try to find a
way to salvage a $3 billion investment in a power
generating plant that could only operate if there
was a natural gas pipeline across Afghanistan?
[ . . .]
- Why has the government not disclosed the
results of massive insider trading in the financial
markets before September 11th that was so
widely and urgently commented on by the likes of
60 Minutes, ABC, Bloomberg, and a multitude of
respected media outlets?
- Why has no one told the American people
about the results of massive numbers of put
options on United Airlines that were placed
through a firm that was headed until 1998 by a
man, A. B. Krongard, who is today in the numberthree position at the CIA?
[ . . .]
The public is rightfully skeptical about a White
House that has lied to them about the events of
September 11th. And I for one am proud to be a
part of the vanguard of courageous independent
journalists and researchers who are continuing to
bring these shocking—yet utterly verifiable—facts
to light.
Source
http://Fromthewilderness.com/free/ww3/062102_
mcr_statement.html. © Michael Ruppert 2002.
All rights reserved.

Ether Zone, “Clinton Body Count” (2000)
The “Clinton Body Count” lists all the deaths of
people allegedly connected to the Clintons. Various
versions of the document have been circulating on
the Internet since Linda Thompson posted her original list of thirty-four suspicious deaths in 1994.
This 2000 version lists sixty-three individuals.
Here is the latest body count that we have. All
of these people have been connected with the
Clintons in some form or another. We have not

included any deaths that could not be verified or
connected to the Clinton scandals. All deaths are
listed chronologically by date. This list is current
and accurate to the best of our knowledge as of
August 1, 2000.
Susan Coleman: Rumors were circulating in
Arkansas of an affair with Bill Clinton. She was
found dead with a gunshot wound to the head at 7
1/2 months pregnant. Death was an apparent
suicide.
Larry Guerrin: Was killed in February 1987
while investigating the INSLAW case.
Kevin Ives & Don Henry: Initial cause of death
was reported to be the result of falling asleep on a
railroad track in Arkansas on August 23, 1987.
This ruling was reported by the State medical
examiner Fahmy Malak. Later it was determined
that Kevin died from a crushed skull prior to
being placed on the tracks. Don had been stabbed
in the back. Rumors indicate that they might have
stumbled upon a Mena drug operation.
Keith Coney: Keith had information on the
Ives/Henry deaths. Died in a motorcycle accident
in July 1988 with unconfirmed reports of a high
speed car chase.
Keith McKaskle: McKaskle had information on
the Ives/Henry deaths. He was stabbed to death
in November 1988.
Gregory Collins: Greg had information on the
Ives/Henry deaths. He died from a gunshot
wound to the face in January 1989.
Jeff Rhodes: He had information on the deaths
of Ives, Henry & McKaskle. His burned body was
found in a trash dump in April 1989. He died of a
gunshot wound to the head and there was some
body mutilation, leading to the speculation
that he was probably tortured prior to being
killed.
James Milam: Milam had information on the
Ives & Henry deaths. He was decapitated. The
state Medical examiner, Fahmy Malak, initially
ruled death due to natural causes.
Richard Winters: Winters was a suspect in the
deaths of Ives & Henry. He was killed in a
“robbery” in July 1989 which was subsequently
proven to be a setup.
877

Ether Zone, “Clinton Body Count”

Jordan Kettleson: Kettleson had information on
the Ives & Henry deaths. He was found shot to
death in the front seat of his pickup in June 1990.
Alan Standorf: An employee of the National
Security Agency in electronic intelligence.
Standorf was a source of information for Danny
Casalaro who was investigating INSLAW, BCCI,
etc. Standorf’s body was found in the backseat of
a car at Washington National Airport on Jan 31,
1991.
Dennis Eisman: An attorney with information
on INSLAW. Eisman was found shot to death on
April 5, 1991.
Danny Casalaro: Danny was a free-lance
reporter and writer who was investigating the
“October Surprise,” INSLAW and BCCI. Danny
was found dead in a bathtub in a Sheraton Hotel
room in Martinsburg, West Virginia. Danny was
staying at the hotel while keeping appointments in
the DC area pertinent to his investigation. He was
found with his wrists slashed. At least one, and
possibly both of his wrists were cut 10 times. All
of his research materials were missing and have
never been recovered.
Victor Raiser: The National Finance Co-Chair
for “Clinton for President.” He died in a airplane
crash on July 30, 1992.
R. Montgomery Raiser: Also involved in the
Clinton presidential campaign. He died in the
same plane crash as Victor.
[ . . .]
Ian Spiro: Spiro had supporting documentation
for grand jury proceedings on the INSLAW case.
His wife and 3 children were found murdered on
November 1, 1992 in their home. They all died of
gunshot wounds to the head. Ian’s body was found
several days later in a parked car in the Borego
Desert. Cause of death? The ingestion of cyanide.
FBI report indicated that Ian had murdered his
family and then committed suicide.
Paula Gober: A Clinton speech writer. She died
in a car accident on December 9, 1992 with no
known witnesses.
Jim Wilhite: Wilhite was an associate of Mack
McClarty’s former firm. Wilhite died in a skiing
accident on December 21, 1992. He also had
878

extensive ties to Clinton with whom he visited by
telephone just hours before his death.
Steve Willis, Robert Williams, Todd McKeahan
& Conway LeBleu: Died Feburary 28, 1993 by
gunfire at Waco. All four were examined by a
pathologist and died from identical wounds to the
left temple. All four had been body guards for Bill
Clinton, three while campaigning for President
and when he was Governor of Arkansas. They also
were the ONLY 4 BATF agents killed at Waco.
[ . . .]
John Crawford: An attorney with information
on INSLAW. He died from a heart attack in
Tacoma in April of 1993.
John Wilson: Found dead from an apparent
hanging suicide on May 18, 1993. He was a
former Washington DC council member and
claimed to have info on Whitewater.
Paul Wilcher: A lawyer who was investigating
drug running out of Mena, Arkansas and who also
sought to expose the “October Surprise,” BCCI
and INSLAW. He was found in his Washington
DC apartment dead of unknown causes on June
22, 1993.
Vincent Foster: A White House deputy counsel
and long-time personal friend of Bill and Hillary’s.
Found on July 20, 1993, dead of a gunshot wound
to the mouth—a death ruled suicide. [ . . .]
Stanley Heard & Steven Dickson: They were
members of the Clinton health care advisory
committee. They died in a plane crash on
September 10, 1993.
Jerry Luther Parks: Parks was the Chief of
Security for Clinton’s national campaign
headquarters in Little Rock. Gunned down in his
car on September 26, 1993 near the intersection of
Chenal Parkway and Highway 10 west of Little
Rock. [ . . .] Parks had been compiling a dossier on
Clinton’s illicit activities. The dossier was stolen.
[ . . .]
Herschell Friday: A member of the presidential
campaign finance committee. He died in an
airplane explosion on March 1, 1994.
[ . . .]
Kathy Furguson: A 38 year old hospital worker
whose ex-husband is a co-defendant in the Paula

Jason Jeffrey, “Brain Zapping”

Jones sexual harassment law suit. She had
information supporting Paula Jone’s allegations.
She died of an apparent suicide on May 11, 1994
from a gunshot wound to the head.
[ . . .]
Ron Brown:. The Commerce Secretary died on
April 3, 1996, in an Air Force jet carrying Brown
and 34 others, including 14 business executives on
a trade mission to Croatia, crashed into a
mountainside.
Source
Published originally at http://www.etherzone.
com/body.html. © Ether Zone Staff. All rights
reserved.

Jason Jeffrey, “Brain Zapping” (2002)
In a long, two-part article for the Australian New
Age web magazine New Dawn, Jason Jeffrey examines the competing explanations for alien abductions—in particular the reports of enforced sexual/medical experiments—and comes to the
conclusion that aliens represent a paranormal dark
force that might operate through advanced technologies of mind control. In the following section, he
argues that alien abductions need to be seen as forms
of modern demons rather than benevolent space
ambassadors or cover stories for military conspiracies against the people—a controlling force more
mysterious and powerful than most conspiracy theorists accept. The article concludes that this evil
force can be resisted by turning to a form of countercultural New Age rejection of the controlling messages of the elite. Jeffrey’s article demonstrates that
many contemporary conspiracy theories—especially
those involving alien abductions and UFOs—are
hard to place on the spectrum of political beliefs.
Over the years, research into mind control has
been carried out by (among others) the US
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), the US
Defence Department, and various multinational
corporations. The ultimate aim of their secretive
research being the manipulation of the human
mind in such a way that the victim is unaware of
such hidden influence.

But mind control operations may go much
further than the use of advanced psychotechnologies. Over recent decades thousands of
people have reported being abducted by ‘aliens’.
These countless stories cannot simply be
dismissed as the result of ‘psychiatric disorder’ as
the vast majority of the individuals do not have a
background of mental illness. However, they all
share in common the experience of being subject
to the UFO/alien phenomenon on TV, at the
movies, or in books. [ . . .] As discussed in the first
part of this article [New Dawn, no. 59], the
technology to beam words and thoughts into
people’s minds already exists. There is also no
doubt that secret research into the creation of
false memories is well advanced. One school of
thought on alien abductions proposes the
phenomenon is directly linked to mind control
operations carried out by the US military.
MILAB (Military Abductions)
The MILAB school of thought suggests abduction
reports are psyops (psychological operations)
disinformation, carried out through the use of
unethical hypnosis and other mind control
technology, by covert human agencies, for
political control purposes. Other schools of
thought on alien abduction argue the aliens are
real (and are genetically taking over mankind), or
that the aliens are friendly and are helping
mankind ‘progress’. Alien mind control is seen
either as a negative (hastening our destruction), or
a positive (a necessity for our advancement).
There are many alien abductee reports of
military/intelligence personnel appearing after
helicopters come into sight. For instance, Debby
Jordan reports in a side note of her book
Abducted! that she was stunned by an alleged
friend and brought to a kind of hospital to be
examined by a medical doctor, who removed an
implant from her ear. The abduction experiences
of Leah Haley and Katharina Wilson are full of
MILAB encounters. Some of Katharina Wilson’s
experiences are comparable with mind control
experiments. She experienced a flashback from
her childhood where she remembers being in a
879

Jason Jeffrey, “Brain Zapping”

hospital and forced into a Skinner Box-like
container possibly used for behaviour
modification experiments. [ . . .] Many researchers
feel such evidence proves the existence of a secret
US military mind control project. Aliens are false
memories implanted by military doctors and
psychiatrists. How this is accomplished may be
explained by an advanced virtual reality
technology. Dr. Karla Turner called these
experiences Virtual Reality Scenarios (VRS).
Many alleged mind control victims claim to
have had pictures implanted in their brain. If a
person was implanted with an intracerebral
device, then the implant operators may be able to
electronically implant pictures and memories into
the brain of the abductee. As reported in first part
of this article, New World Vistas was a major
undertaking for the USAF Scientific Advisory
Board (SAB). This military publication, published
in 1996, forecasts possible military developments
over the next 50 years. In the publication, military
scientists suggest that the development of
electromagnetic energy sources—the output of
which can be pulsed, shaped, and focused—could
be coupled with the human body in a fashion that
will allow one to prevent voluntary muscular
movements, control emotions and actions,
produce sleep, transmit suggestions, interfere
with both short-term and long-term memory,
produce an experience set and delete an
experience set. If such technology was developed
in secret and exists today, the unexplainable
vividness of some abduction accounts may be
explained by the implantation of an experience set
into the brain of an abductee.
Behind the Abduction Facade
The general consensus among researchers, who
believe alien abductions are mind control
operations, is that the reported little grey alien
kidnappers are just cover stories implanted by
military and/or intelligence agency psychiatrists.
Another widely held view is that real aliens
abduct people and implant, with different levels
of success, a variety of cover stories. Yet another
theory is that both the military and aliens are
880

kidnapping people! [ . . .] Any valid theory on socalled alien abductions must stand up to scrutiny,
explain all the cases and not just a percentage,
and offer some logical perspective on the
mystery. Most people are conditioned to view
strange phenomena through the eyes of a modern
scientist, only looking for physical evidence. The
majority of modern day UFO researchers are
caught up in this mind set—intent on gathering
photographs, ‘implants’ and interviews—but
failing to see the deeper implications and the notso-obvious. Abductees may describe ‘grey aliens’
as the kidnappers, but it does not necessarily
follow that real ‘grey aliens’ are responsible. As
we have seen, psycho-technologies and
manipulation of the mind can be used to create
cover stories.
Humanity has only begun to rediscover the
great mysteries and powers of the brain. Astral
travel, Out-of-Body Experiences, channelling of
extraterrestrial entities, and encounters with Yetis
are all examples of other unusual phenomena
experienced by millions of people. To these
people, those experiences are as ‘real’ as an alien
abduction. It seems we are dealing with
phenomena outside the bounds of normal
scientific inquiry. Powerful forces and entities
existing on a different plane of existence to that of
humanity, or cohabiting the Earth in another
dimension. [ . . .]
Could these beings enter our realities through
some portal in the human mind? If they have the
ability to enter our brains on some other plane,
what do they want? And consider this: If they can
control energy and matter and change form, what
lies behind the alien masks? [ . . .]
Demons and Aliens
We can see from the available evidence that the
so-called alien abduction phenomenon is of a
paranormal nature. History is replete with stories
of similar encounters with strange beings. Of
particular note are reports, mainly from the socalled medieval period, of women claiming to be
attacked at night by demons. Taking the outward
form of demons, these ‘incubus’ (male demons)

Jason Jeffrey, “Brain Zapping”

and ‘succubi’ (female demons) would paralyse
their victims and engage in sexual intercourse.
Are these demons still at work today? It has
been suggested in our time these same beings
take on the form of aliens, stealing cover images
from the depths of humanity’s collective
unconsciousness. [ . . .]
Men in Black
The parallels between demonic possession and
alien abductions should now be plainly obvious.
These same forces take on a shape and form
recognisable to a particular generation. They wrap
themselves in the cultural and popular notions of
the day, tricking people into believing their cover
story. Alien abduction encounters are the modern
day equivalents of medieval demonic possession—
only now the victims experience the phenomenon
in the light of modern day terminology and
imagery. On their operating tables the ‘aliens’
extract sperm and ova (the most pure and highly
energised substance of the human body) from the
‘abductee’. The whole scene looks like a medical
operation, only that the victim is forced and the
perpetrators wear masks. They sometimes come
in their flying saucers, an image solidly implanted
into the minds of the public via fifty years of UFO
movies, TV shows, magazines and books.
Another historical phenomenon connected with
UFOs is the mysterious appearance of strange
dark figures known as ‘Men in Black’, or MIB.
They are usually somewhat ‘demonic’ in
appearance, slant-eyed, very tall and radiating
strong auras of total menace. MIB encounters
often were connected to: temperature effects,
pains, a pungent sulphurous odour, moving and
flashing lights, astral projection, discarnate voices
seemingly combined with telepathy, poltergeist
effects in the radio being turned on, hypnotic
effects, time distortion, a special object, a
visionary trip and beautiful alien women—all
hallmarks of paranormal/psychic activity. [ . . .]
The Controllers
[ . . .] Identifying these dark forces and their real
purpose is extremely difficult and it would seem,

highly dangerous. Have they been controlling
humanity for thousands of years? Did some group
or secret society call them up into our plane of
reality? [ . . .] If the whole thing is a cosmic
conspiracy of sorts, then all humanity have been
pawns in the game of these ‘dark gods’ for
millennia. It only follows that these same forces
have directed human history. [ . . .]
How to Resist
The way out of this all-pervading control
syndrome is to launch creative revolts against it.
But first the individual must educat[e] him or
herself to understand their own nature. Get in
touch with one’s own inner space and eject all
elements of ‘control’. Use creativity as a weapon.
Resistance to any form of mind control is
simple. On a basic level, any individual can
concentrate towards being fully aware and
awake at all times. For example, TV
advertisements are designed to implant
subliminal messages into our brains. Be aware of
that fact and consciously and subconsciously
resist it. Think for yourself and don’t accept
anything at face value. Anyone reading
magazines like New Dawn will realise they have
been fed lies and disinformation by the elitists
through the mainstream media. [ . . .] Being
kept in ignorance by the ruling elite, people are
left wide open to control. The ultimate goal of
today’s elites is summed up in the mantra:
consume, breed, die. Your purpose is nothing
more than to live as an ignorant robot, serving
the elites of this world, and being psychic ‘food’
for dark metaphysical forces. This analysis might
sound very negative and imply the situation is
hopeless. But that’s how it’s always been for
humanity. Nevertheless, there’s always been a
path open for us to go beyond the human
condition and reach for the stars. Break free
from ignorance and smash the bonds of control.
Source
Jeffrey, Jason. 2002. “Brain Zapping.” New Dawn
Magazine 60. Available at http://www.
newdawnmagazine.com/Articles/
Brain%20Zapping2.html.

881

Robert Helmer, “Shell Extension City: The True Story”

Robert Helmer, “Shell Extension City:
The True Story” (c. 2002)
In this article from his Shell Extension City website, Bob Helmer tells a version of the story about
an alien spacecraft crash-landing in Roswell, New
Mexico, in 1947. In Helmer’s account, the U.S. government was able to rescue an encoded disk from
the site. This “circular object,” according to
Helmer, was the subject of intensive secret scientific
analysis, which took place at a secret air force base
in the desert known as Shell Extension City. In this
piece, the author claims to have firsthand knowledge of the base.
On July 8, 1947, at the so called “Foster Ranch”
in the desert outside Roswell, New Mexico, a
certain incident occurred. While the details of the
incident are vague at best, and no certain
conclusions can be drawn from the many
contradictory stories surrounding it, one thing is
clear: a small disk, made of apparently magnetic
materials embedded and sheathed in celluloid or
flexible bakelite, was recovered by RAAF
investigators from a Major Jesse Marcel, a RAAF
officer who was one of the first to explore the site
of the “incident.”
The item was immediately taken to the Foreign
Technology Division of Air Materiel Command at
Wright Patterson Air Force Base for analysis.
While the exact results of that analysis have never
been released, it is known that the intelligence
and engineering branches at Wright Patterson
created a “top secret” memorandum for the
Chief, Air Intelligence Division, dated October
11, 1948, signed by a Colonel Brooke Allen, Chief
of the Air Estimates Branch at Wright Patterson.
The stated subject of the memorandum is
“Analysis of Circular Object.”
The thrust of the memorandum was that while
the disk’s secrets remained mostly unrevealed, it
was known that it contained what the authors
described as “code,” the deciphering of which
could be of tremendous value to the military.
Specificially, the memorandum stated that the
analysis had revealed what the authors described

882

as “windows” into theretofore unknown
technologies.
Little progress was made in replicating the
object, and in fact, the CIA-sponsored Robertson
Panel, so named after its chairman Dr. Harold P.
Robertson, director of the Weapons Systems
Evaluation Group for the Secretary of Defense,
reported that attempts to “reverse engineer” it
were nil.
Nevertheless, research continued, and a panel
convened in Washington, DC, in mid January of
1953 (consisting of some of the best scientific
minds of the day, including a future Nobel Prize
laureate in physics, Luis Alvarez, formerly of
Berkeley; physicist Samuel Goudsmit of the
Brookhaven National Laboratories; astronomer
Thornton Page of Johns Hopkins University, later
with NASA, and other luminaries who would later
win kudos for their work on the staffs at Xerox
Parc, Apple Computer Company, and other top
projects).
The panel’s report was outlined in a document
later retrieved in 1997 under the Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA). While the proprietary
systems embedded in the object could not be
replicated, the Panel wrote, an heuristic could be
devised so that the unknown internal mechanisms
of the disk (code named, “Kernel”) could yet be
manipulated by linking to its surface (code
named, “Shell’’)—hopefully allowing access to and
expansion upon its inner workings, and thus,
through such “shell extensions,” providing a boon
to the military-scientific community, which had
great hopes that the technology embedded in the
disk could be used for the expansion of scientific
knowledge and the pursuit of peace.
The Report concluded with the suggestion that
a recommendation be made to the President and
the NSC that they mobilize all the scientific
resources of this country and create for study of
the device a think tank, the scope of which would
rival the Manhattan Project. Originally known as
MJ-90, or Majestic, the project was created in
1956 at a secret air force base in the desert
outside Las Vegas; researchers associated with the

Robert Gaylon Ross Sr., “Globalization and Secret Societies Exposed”

Majestic project quickly dubbed the air force
base, “Shell Extension City.”
Though secrecy was great, for many years the
existence of Shell Extension City was rumored,
particularly among the technological cognescenti
in Las Vegas, but neither the military nor the
intelligence community would confirm its
existence. [ . . .] Then came the fateful day in
1997, when an ex-military contractor, who claimed
to have worked at Shell Extension City, came
forward (possibly at great risk to himself) and gave
extensive interviews to members of several
amatuer groups who had been studying other
“Shell-Kernel” phenomona on their own (and who
had been labled “fringe” groups by the scientific
community).
This individual, though he prefers to remain
unnamed, actually drove the author of this article
into the Neveda desert on State Highway 375,
and, under cover of night, took him to a small
plateau, from which could be seen, on the desert
floor below, the hustle and bustle of a small
military base, complete with lighted airplane
runways, and numerous hangers and personnel.
All this in a place which is but a blank spot on the
map of that state. [ . . .]
With its secret breached, the government
would no longer maintain the secret air base in
Nevada, and in fact, on a recent return visit to
that plateau, the author was able to confirm that
what once had been a very active military
installation had since become a veritable ghost
town, the inhabitants apparently having packed
every portable object, abandoning only the few
airplane hangers and guardhouses, which have
quickly fallen victim to the desert elements.
As for the magnetic disk itself, no one knows
with precision its current whereabouts, although
rumor has it that yet another secret installation
exists, in the American northwest, under close
guard of the most secret agencies of the
Department of Defense.
Source
Available at http://shellcity.net/true.htm. © Robert
Helmer. All rights reserved.

Robert Gaylon Ross Sr.,
“Globalization and Secret
Societies Exposed” (2003)
Robert Gaylon Ross produces a website of news
commentary under the company name RIE (Ross
International Enterprises). In its full version this
piece combines a host of familiar conspiracy ideas
about globalist institutions and interprets contemporary events such as the Iraq war in the light of
these speculations.
The Elite have covertly redefined the term
conspiracy to imply that anyone who believes in
conspiracies must be a kook, so they must
disregard anything that these kooks say, because
they are mentally deranged. This is not a
conspiracy theory site. This site contains only
conspiracy facts. [ . . .]
Globalization
The conspiracy facts are that Elite inner circle
members of the Bilderbergs (BB), Council on
Foreign Relations (CFR), and Trilateral
Commission (TC) are conspiring to politically
and economically dominate the entire world
under their New World Order, more recently
called Globalization, or Global Union, Global
Economy, Global Order, Global Environment,
and like terms. When President G.H.W. Bush
used the term New World Order in several of his
speeches, it aroused suspicion and concern
among the public. So, the Elite selected a generic
term “Globalization” to use, and now Americans
are no longer alarmed, because the business
world uses this term daily, so it must not be so
frightening. But, you cannot change a tiger’s
stripes. We’re still talking about the New World
Order. If you don’t know about the BB, CFR,
and TC, or who are the members of these secret
organizations, then you must have a copy of
Who’s Who of the Elite.
“In politics, nothing happens by accident. If it
happens, you can bet it was planned that way”
(Franklin Delanor Roosevelt).

883

Anti-Defamation League (ADL), “Minister Farrakhan: In His Own Words”

American Union
The Elite plan to create the American Union by
January, 2005. This will include all of the nations
of North, Central and South America and the
Caribbean Islands, and will function just like the
present European Union. There will be only one
monetary system, one central bank, one
(unelected) governing body, one military force,
one judicial system, no borders, and no
Constitution and Bill of Rights. The Elite have
invented a new term for expanded NAFTA, which
they now call FTAA, or Free Trade Area of the
Americas. The Council of the Americas, at the
Quebec City conference in March, 2001, stated
very clearly that they plan to complete the FTAA
by the year 2005. [ . . .]
It is obvious that they are really talking about
the American Union which they plan to complete
by January, 2005. That’s less than two years away,
my friends. Just when are you planning to get
concerned? The American Union follows the first
step, the European Union, in the Elite’s plan to
control the entire world. Next will be the Asian
Union, the African Union, and the Soviet Union,
all to be completed between the years 2010 and
2015. This is not my speculation, it’s their stated
plans, as detailed in a UN document titled “Our
Global Neighborhood.” All nations of the world
will be included in the Global Union, except those
nations dominated by Islam. Perhaps that is why
the Elite are planning wars against the Islamic
nations. [ . . .]
Spying on U.S. Citizens
There is now a proposal to open all snail-mail sent
to Congress, digitize it, and make it available to
the recipient by E-mail. The stated purpose of
doing this is to protect members of Congress from
anthrax, and to save their staff time in opening the
mail. The REAL reason is to snoop the
correspondence to see what is inside. All
electronic means of correspondence are now
being monitored by NSA’s operation ECHELON.
Once they have digitized the snail-mail, there will
be no secrets between members of Congress and
their constituents. They now snoop every
884

electronic transmission (fax, E-mail, telephone,
Telex, radio, etc.) by the N.S.A.’s Operation
ECHELON. [ . . .] The Pentagon now has an
operation called Total Information Awareness
(TIA), which is made up of a bank of very
powerful computers containing unbelievable
amounts of information on US citizens. These
computers track each person’s credit card, airline
ticket, and rental car transactions, passports,
driver’s licenses, and on and on. [ . . .]
Nanobots
Now, you are going to say that I’ve really gone
crazy! But, what if the Elite invented a very small
robot, or nanobot, and injected it into your
bloodstream when you get your next injection,
and when the time is right, they send a signal to
your body activating these little devils to do their
programmed duty? This duty could be either
beneficial or detrimental—who knows? There are
frequent scares about anthrax and other biological
agents threatening our lives. Could this be an
opportunity to inject these nanobots into your
bloodstream?
Source
Available at http://www.4rie.com/mainindex.html.

Anti-Defamation League (ADL), “Minister
Farrakhan: In His Own Words” (2003)
The Anti-Defamation League is a long-running
organization dedicated to monitoring and opposing
hate crimes and anti-Semitism in particular. In this
report, the league highlights the tendency of Nation
of Islam leader Louis Farrakhan to draw on conspiratorial and antisemitic rhetoric in his speeches
and interviews.
Louis Farrakhan, leader of the Nation of Islam,
has long expressed anti-Semitic and anti-white
rhetoric which has marked him as a notable figure
on the extremist scene. In recent years, this
demagogue has been a frequent speaker on
college campuses and at rallies, where he has
been received enthusiastically by thousands of
people. Indeed, his February 23, 2003 Saviour’s

Anti-Defamation League (ADL), “Minister Farrakhan: In His Own Words”

day speech, (excerpts below) is testimony to the
unchanging nature of his views. [ . . .]
On the US Government:
“I hasten to tell you that the precious lives that
were lost in the World Trade Center was a cover,
a cover for a war that had been planned to bring a
pipeline through Afghanistan to bring oil from
that region, oil owned by Unical of which Dick
Cheney is a stock holder.”
Saviours’ Day Speech, Chicago, 2/23/03
[ . . .]
On Jewish Conspiracies:
“The warmongers in his [Bush’s]
administration, the poor Israeli Zionists, have
literally gotten America’s foreign policy to protect
Israel. Now many of you won’t say these things,
but that’s on you. Daniel Perle or Richard Perle,
Wolfowitz, Kristol—all of these are architects of
policy and they are pro-Israel. One American
congressman said listen, the cornerstone of
America’s foreign policy is the protection of
Israel.”
Saviours’ Day Speech, Chicago, 2/23/03
Farrakhan: “Is the Federal Reserve owned by
the government?”
Audience: “No.”
Farrakhan: “Who owns the federal reserve?”
Audience: “Jews.”
Farrakhan: “The same year they set up the IRS,
they set up the FBI. And the same year they set up
the Anti-Defamation League of B’nai B’rith . . . It
could be a coincidence . . . [I want] to see black
intellectuals free . . . I want to see them not
controlled by members of the Jewish community.”
Dallas Observer on-line, 8/10/00
[ . . .]
“I believe that for the small numbers of Jewish
people in the United States, they exercise a
tremendous amount of influence on the affairs of
government. . . . Yes, they exercise extraordinary
control, and Black people will never be free in
this country until they are free of that kind of
control. . . .”

Meet the Press interview, 4/14/97
“To continue to point out the truth of that
control and how that control never will allow us to
be full and completely men, free, justified, and
equal. Why should we be controlled by the power,
influence, and money of others? We should not be
under that kind of control . . . going to Jewish
philanthropists, begging them for money to
support our causes, and through that money,
there is control, and that kind of control limits the
freedom of our people to speak freely, write
freely, think freely, and act as free men . . .”
Meet the Press interview, 4/14/97
“And you do with me as is written, but
remember that I have warned you that Allah will
punish you. You are wicked deceivers of the
American people. You have sucked their blood.
You are not real Jews, those of you that are not
real Jews. You are the synagogue of Satan, and
you have wrapped your tentacles around the U.S.
government, and you are deceiving and sending
this nation to hell. But I warn you in the name of
Allah, you would be wise to leave me alone. But if
you choose to crucify me, know that Allah will
crucify you.”
[ . . .]
“We are not giving them [Jews] power by
getting into the debate, they already have power.
They control Black intellectuals, they control
Black politicians, Black preachers, Black artists—
they control Black life. I’m not against Jews, I’m
against control by any group, of us. . . . I don’t
know how you can talk about Black liberation
without confronting that and not talk about those
who stifle Black thought, freedom of Black
liberation.”
Daily Challenge, 10/12/00
[ . . .]
“How did we get into World War II? You say
Japan attacked Pearl Harbor. Yes, they did, but
what were the forces that created in Japan the
desire or the need to force them to attack
America? You don’t know that. But when America
went to war after the attack on Pearl Harbor, she
885

Lawton et al. v. Republic of Iraq

had to borrow money. There were the
international bankers again. They financed all
sides. And how many millions of Americans lost
their lives? Suppose Hitler was trying to destroy
the international bankers controlling Europe, but
he went about it by attacking a whole people. All
Jews are not responsible for the evil of the few
who do evil. . . . But certain Jews have used
Judaism as a shield.”
Saviours’ Day Speech, Chicago, 2/26/95
Source
Anti-Defamation League website: http://www.adl.
org/special_reports/farrakhan_own_words/
farrakhan_own_words.asp. Reprinted with
permission of the Anti-Defamation League.

Lawton et al. v. Republic of Iraq (2003)
This lawsuit, prepared for a group of survivors and
victims’ families, charges the Republic of Iraq with
abetting the terrorist attack on the Murrah Building in Oklahoma in 1995.
[ . . .] 5. The parties hereto are all Oklahoma
citizens or former Oklahoma citizens who are
either survivors of the Murrah Building bombing
of April 19, 1995, or who lost loved ones in that
terrorist attack. All Plaintiffs are citizens of the
United States.
6. Defendant, The Republic of Iraq, is a foreign
sovereign whose activities were outside the scope
of immunity as provided by the Foreign Sovereign
Immunities Act. As noted, Defendant has been
declared a state sponsoring terrorism since
September 1990.
7. The parties hereto, based on their collective
knowledge and on the knowledge of other victims
of the bombing of April 19, 1995, believe that the
attack was not as simple as has been portrayed by
the United States government during the criminal
trials of Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols.
Specifically, upon information and belief,
Plaintiffs assert that other individuals were
involved in preparation for and execution of the
attack. Plaintiffs assert that the entire plot was, in
whole or in part, orchestrated, assisted technically
886

and/or financially, and directly aided by agents of
The Republic of Iraq. Plaintiffs further assert that
this attack was an illegal continuation of the
Persian Gulf War. Plaintiffs herein assert that they
or their loved ones are, in effect, civilian casualties
of said Gulf War in a manner contrary to the
Geneva Convention and other applicable
international treaties. Plaintiffs assert that the
involvement and complicity of Iraq can be proven
by both direct and circumstantial evidence in
classic application, i.e., means, opportunity and
motive, to wit:
Iraq Had the “Means” to Commit
Terrorist Acts in the United States.
Prior to the Gulf War, Iraq had developed a
covert network in the United States to acquire
materials for weapons of mass destruction. After
the Gulf War, Iraq converted that network into
organized terrorist cells. Those covert Iraqi
procurement and terrorist activities directly
involved Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
[ . . .]
(B) “Opportunity” to Commit the Murrah
Building Bombing.
27. In summary, Iraq had the “opportunity”
through its agent, Ramzi Youssef, and through
other individuals to assist in both the technical
planning, and in the execution of the Oklahoma
City Murrah Building bombing. Having expended
considerable resources in developing covert
procurement and terrorist cells in the United
States, Iraq did not forego the opportunity to
provide training and support to domestic
extremists, like Nichols and McVeigh, who were
already pre-disposed to terrorism and to “acts of
revenge” against the U.S. government.
(C) Iraq Had “Motive” to Attack the United
States in April 1995.
28. When it became clear that Iraq was losing
the 1991 Gulf War, Iraq repeatedly threatened
revenge. Specifically, the Iraqi people will “avenge
the pure blood that has been shed no matter how
long it takes” as spoken by then First Deputy
Prime Minister of Baghdad Domestic Service,
Taha Yasin Ramadan on February 15, 1991. In

Lawton et al. v. Republic of Iraq

November 1992, Saddam Hussein, himself,
announced in Ramadi, Iraq that “the mother of
battles . . . has continued and will continue.”
[ . . .]
In summary, Iraq had sufficient “motive,” and
Saddam Hussein had previously demonstrated
sufficient propensity, to execute a major terrorist
attack against the United States in the spring of
1995, and certainly after the events of April 10,
1995.

[ . . .]
32. Plaintiffs assert that the entire plot to blow
up the Murrah Building on April 19, 1995 was, in
whole or in part, orchestrated, assisted technically
and/or financially, and directly aided by agents of
The Republic of Iraq.
[ . . .]
Source
Available at http://www.okcbombing.org/
News%20Articles/lawsuit.htm.

887

Index
A-Albionic Consulting and Research, 135
Abdel-Rahman, Omar, 372
Abduction: Human Encounters with Aliens
(Mack), 703, 744
Abduction Study Conference (MIT), 703
Abedi, Agha Hasa, 106–107
Abolitionism, 4–5, 27–33, 66, 478, 659,
696
toward the Civil War, 31–33
John Brown, 135–137
media campaign, 30–31
from moderation to radicalism, 28–30
See also Slave revolts
Abortion, 33–35, 229
Abouhalima, Mahmoud, 230, 372
Abraham, Larry, 233, 624
Abrams, Creighton, 151, 152
Abrams, Elliot, 353
Abt, John, 567
Abu-Jamal, Mumia, 514
Acheson, Dean, 90, 462, 714
“Adam Weishaupt, 1776, The Green Back,
and All That,” 846
Adams, Joan Vollmer, 147
Adams, John, 226
Alien and Sedition Acts and, 3, 50–51,
53, 55, 338, 511, 545
on Boston Massacre, 131
monarchist conspiracy and, 134–135,
296
XYZ affair and, 745–746
Adams, John Quincy, 3, 115, 358, 545
Adams, Samuel, 50, 132, 133, 196, 671,
768
Adams, Samuel Hopkins, 299
Adamski, George, 701
Addison, Alexander, 51
Address of the People of England to the
Inhabitants of America, The
(Dalrymple), 134

Aerial Phenomena Research Organization
(APRO), 701, 704
Afghanistan, 551–552
Africa, John, 513
African Americans, 11–12, 30, 35–40, 662
AIDS conspiracy and, 35, 39–40, 45,
46–47
antisemitism and, 84
black male bodies, 35–36
century of conspiracies, 36–38
CIA and, 38, 127
drugs as conspiracy against, 39–40,
454–455, 513, 561–562, 577
FBI and, 38–39, 127–128, 171, 249
in film, 258–259
genocide theories, 45–46, 652
historical context for conspiracy
theories, 35–36
Prince Hall Freemasons, 274
red scare and, 611, 614–616
sterilization theories, 38–39
See also Black Panther Party; Civil
rights movement; Slave Power; Slave
revolts; Slavery
African Church, 714, 715
Against Oligarchy (Tarpley), 673
The Age of Reason (Paine), 511
Age of Reform (Hofstadter), 590
Agency, 15–16, 23, 260
Agent Orange, 40–42, 561. See also Gulf
War Syndrome; Vietnam
“Agent Orange,” 869
Agrarian movements, 104, 201, 589–590,
592, 617–618
Agriculture Department, 105
AIDS, 42–47, 562
African Americans and, 35, 39–40, 45,
46–47
casual contact model, 43, 45
CBW context, 43, 44, 46

early researchers, 43–44
KGB disinformation, 42–43
nonviral theories, 44–45
responses to theories, 46–47
“The AIDS-ET Connection” (Duke), 46
Aircraft
Aurora, 91, 100–101, 198
Blackbird, 101
B-25 Ghost Bomber, 103–104
Hyper-X program, 101
RC-135, 382
SR-71 Blackbird, 100
U-2 spy plane, 521, 565
X-33 program, 101
See also Area 51
Aircraft crashes
Air India 182, 573
Flight 93, 472
Flight 77, 649
Gander, Newfoundland (1985), 573
KAL 007, 381–383, 544
NASA and, 502, 503
Pan Am 103, 571–574, 697
TWA 800, 561, 572, 573, 696–698
U-2 spy plane, 521
Ajaj, Ahmad M., 230
Albigensian Crusade, 593
Aldrich, Nelson, 253, 507, 623
Aldrich, Winthrop, 623
Aldrin, Buzz, 502–503
Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building. See
Oklahoma City bombing
Alien and Sedition Acts (1798), 3, 48–55,
135, 225, 282, 367, 530, 545, 779
fears of Illuminati, 338, 511, 622, 746
Federalist enforcement of domestic
security, 53–55, 300
origins of, 50–53
political paranoia in the 1790s, 48–50
“Alien/CIA Connection,” 847

889

Index

Alien Harvest (Howe), 125
Allardyce, Robert, 381–383
Allbaugh, Joe M., 251
Allen, Carl (Carlos Allende), 584–585
Allen, Charles, 413
Allen, Ethan, 92
Allen, F. L., 142
Allen, Gary, 624
Allen, John, 51, 52–53
Allen, Morse, 157
Allen, Oscar Kelly, 446
Allen, Paul, 466
All the President’s Men (Bernstein and
Woodward), 730
All the President’s Men (Pakula), 258, 571
Al-Qaeda, 230, 372
Alternative Health Movement, 306
Altgeld, John, 305
Altham, John, 369
Altman, Robert, 541
Aluminum industry, 264–265
Amazons (DeLillo), 219
Amendments to the Constitution
First, 197, 325, 530, 582, 659
Second, 197, 467–468, 519, 554, 586
Fourth, 197, 522
Fifth, 36, 659
Thirteenth, 662
Fourteenth, 438, 591
Sixteenth, 342, 343
Eighteenth, 143, 249
America First Party, 139, 666
American Anti-Slavery Society, 30, 31
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU),
71, 142, 327, 334, 409
An American Dream (Mailer), 453
American exceptionalism, 2, 18
American Free Press, 198, 669
American Indian Movement (AIM),
55–58, 186–188, 285
American Justice Federation, 144, 177,
718
American Legion, 346, 419
American Medical Association (AMA), 33,
170, 306
American Nazi Party (ANP), 420, 534,
586
“American Nuclear Guinea Pigs”
(Markey), 838
American Party. See Know-Nothing
(American) Party
“American Platform of Principles,” 793
American Protective Association (APA), 6,
58–59, 66, 532
American Protective League (APL),
615–616
American Republican Party, 531. See also
Republican Party

890

American Revolution, 49, 59–61, 145, 196,
229, 672
Benedict Arnold, 92–94
Continental Army, 199–200, 539–541,
667
English conspiracy theories, 60–61, 134
fear of conspiracies, 18, 658–659
militias and, 470, 473
Native Americans and, 527
Shays’ Rebellion, 3, 617, 652–653, 668
American Rifleman, 519–520
American Spectator, 645, 646
American Terrorist: Timothy McVeigh and
the Oklahoma City Bombing
(Herbeck and Michael), 553–554
Americana (DeLillo), 219
Americanization, 532–533
“Americans Beware” (Columbus Record),
799
America’s Militia Threat (Dee), 473
Ames, Fisher, 134, 368
Anarchists, 62–63, 88, 289, 538. See also
Haymarket bombing; Unabomber
Anatomy of a Phenomenon (Vallée),
584–585
Ancient Order of Hibernians (AOH),
492–494
Anderson, Benjamin, 203
Anderson, Gillian, 743
Anderson, Jack, 163, 325
Anderson, John, 692
André, John, 93–94
Andrews, Lola, 638
Andrews, Samuel, 623
Andrews, Ted, 406
Andropov, Yuri, 381
Andros, Edmund, 425, 600–601
Angel, 743–744
Anglo-Dutch wars, 104, 425
Animal rights organizations, 230
Anslinger, Harry J., 236–239
Anthony, Carl Sferrazza, 299
Anthrax, 34
Anti-Ballistic Missile System, 382, 543
Anti-Catholicism, 63–68
contemporary expressions, 67–68
immigrants and, 65–67
Ku Klux Klan, 64, 67, 417–419
Maria Monk and, 66, 496–498, 530
nativism, 4, 7, 66, 530–531
organizations, 58–59
See also Catholic Church
Antichrist, 9, 10, 120, 139, 758
aliens and, 704
antisemitism and, 80
apocalypticism and, 86, 88, 89, 474,
476–477
fundamentalism and, 89

George III as, 3
humanism and, 648
mind control and, 492
one-world government and, 559, 621
Protocols of the Elders of Zion and, 595
Reagan as, 39
Anticommunism, 19, 68–73, 85, 419, 503,
645
after 1950, 71–72
conspiracy of communism, 69–71
FBI and, 72, 248–249, 324
Hollywood Ten, 318–321
HUAC and, 325–327
John Birch society, 373–374
McCarthy and, 460–464
from red scare to red decade, 68–69
Anti-Defamation League (ADL) of B’nai
B’rith, 124, 246, 472–473, 534, 597,
884
Anti-Federalists, 73–75, 196, 197, 225, 668
Freemasonry and, 272–273
Antigovernment movements, 472. See also
Militias; Posse Comitatus
Anti-Masonic Convention, 785
Anti-Masonic movement, 85, 273–274,
507–508. See also Freemasonry
Anti-Masonic Party, xi, 3, 75–77, 81, 273
Antinomians, 331, 599
Anti–old world conspiracy theory, 123
Anti-Priest Law, 369–370
Anti-Rent Association, 77–78
Antisemitism, 79–85, 88, 124, 137, 167
brown scare and, 138–139
Catholicism and, 209–210
chimerical, 80
Christian Identity and, 167–168
Civil War, 81
in colonial and antebellum America,
79–81
Coughlin and, 207–210
Farrakhan and, 248
forms of, 79
Gerald L. K. Smith and, 666–667
Illuminati and, 80, 82–84
interactionist models, 81
Ku Klux Klan, 322, 418, 419–420, 421
left-wing, 82
militias and, 468, 472–473
modern political and economic, 81–82
post–cold war trends, 84–85
Pound and, 593–594
Silver Shirts and, 654
United Nations and, 707
See also Ford, Henry; Holocaust denial;
Jews; Protocols of the Elders of Zion
Antisyndicalism legislation, 612
Antiwar movement, World War I, 321–322
APA. See American Protective Association

Index

Apocalypticism, 85–91, 477
Christian, 86–87
Freemasons, Jews, and communists,
87–88
fundamentalism and, 88–89
New World Order, 89–90
Apollo project, 500–503
App, Austin, 322, 323
An Appeal to the Colored Citizens of the
World, 29, 30
Applied Digital Solutions, 334–335
Aquash, Anna Mae, 57, 186
Arabella, 1
Arab-Israeli War of 1967 (Six Day War),
323, 376
Arafat, Yassir, 573
Arbenz, Jacobo, 117
“Are Credit Cards Associated with the
Mark of the Beast?” (Robertson),
838
Area 51, 91–92, 100, 120, 704
Arendt, Hannah, 597
Arizona Viper Militia, 470
ARKANSAS Project, 177, 646
Arkin, Eli, 408, 409
Arlington Road, 260–261
Armas, Carlos Castillo, 156
Armed Forces Security Agency (AFSA),
242
Armstrong, John, 540
Armstrong, Neil, 502
Army Chemical Corps Special Operations
Division (SOD), 448
Army Corps of Engineers, 103, 711
Army Intelligence, 376, 395
Martin Luther King and, 376
Army of God, 34–35, 229
Army of Northern Virginia, 436, 440–441
Army-McCarthy hearings, 463
Arness, James, 256
Arnold, Benedict, 8, 92–94, 134
Arnold, Kenneth, 699
Arnold, Matthew, 594
ARPAnet, 347
The Arrival, 257
Articles of Confederation, 74, 196, 224,
225, 544
Aryan Congress, 633
Aryan Nations, 10, 94–95, 121, 143,
167, 473, 535, 592, 633, 667, 683,
684
Aryan Republican Army (ARA), 556, 557,
585
Aryan Warriors, 94
Aryan World Congress, 94
Asian Americans, 95–97
Assassination attempts
Frick, Henry Clay, 62

Reagan, Ronald, 149–150, 427,
609–610
Roosevelt, Franklin, 625
Walker, Earl, 566
Assassination Records Collection Act of
1992, 678
Assassinations, xi, 22, 519
abortion doctors, 34
Berg, Alan, 121–122
Casolaro, Danny, 550, 672
in film, 258
Freemasons and, 76, 77
Jewish Defense League and, 371–372
Johnson and, 375
Kahane, Meir, 372–373
Lennon, John, 426–428
Long, Huey, 446–447
Mafia and, 451
Manson and, 459–460
Marilyn Monroe conspiracy, 498–500
McKinley, William, 62–63, 311–312,
564
Molly Maguires and, 492–495
Rockwell, George Lincoln, 534–535
Steamshovel Press articles, 672
Welch, Richard S., 211
See also Kennedy, John F., Jr.,
assassination; Kennedy, Robert F.,
assassination; King, Martin Luther,
Jr., assassination; Malcolm X,
assassination
Assassinations Committee (1979), 568
Asseveration, 334
Asylum tradition, 529–530
Atkins, Susan, 460
Atlanta child murders, 38, 39
Atlanta Olympic Bombing, 230
Atlas Shrugged (Rand), 431
Atomic secrets, 97–100
Atomic weapons, 191
Atta, Mohammed, 650
Attentat, 62
Attucks, Crispus, 131
Atzerodt, George, 436–437
Aukerman, Dale, 89
Aum Shinrikyo, 90, 230, 476
Aurora, 100–101
Aurora, 51, 54, 338, 367
Aurora (aircraft), 91, 198
Auschwitz-Birkenau, 321
The Awful Disclosures of the Hotel Dieu
Nunnery of Montreal (Monk), 66,
496–498, 530
Ayers, I. Winslow, 203
B-25 Ghost Bomber, 103–104
Bache, Benjamin Franklin, 54, 746
Bacon, Francis, 233

Bacon, Nathaniel, 104–105
Bacon’s Rebellion, 104–105
Bailey, Gamaliel, 659
Bailyn, Bernard, 19
Bainerman, Joel, 175
Baker, George F., 253, 507
Baker, Lafayette C., 130, 437–438
Baldwin, James, 38
Balfour, Arthur, 757
Balfour, Bobbie, 406
Balfour declaration, 757
Ballard, J. G., 216
Balloon trials, 628, 629
Balsiger, David, 439–440
Baltimore Documents, 314
Banco Ambrosiano, 106
Banco Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL),
105–106, 107
Bani Sadr, Abol Hassan, 547
Banister, Guy, 389–390, 392, 677
Bank of Credit and Commerce
International (BCCI), 106–108
Bank of England, 105–106, 108–110, 142,
214, 288, 673, 674
Federal Reserve System and, 110,
254–255
gold and, 109, 286
Bank of the United States (BUS)
First Bank, 110–112, 114, 287
Second Bank, 112, 122, 252, 287,
358–361
Bank War, 112–115, 123, 358–361
Banking, ix
BCCI, 106–108
bimetallic standard, 288, 506
BNL, 105–106
branches, 113, 252, 287, 590
chartered, 286–287
dual system, 252–253
free banking laws, 286–287
greenbacks, 287
Iran-Contra and, 351
Morgan and, 505–507
national banks, 287, 359
New York banks, 252, 253
pet banks, 114, 123, 360
savings and loan crisis, 643–645
silver, 285, 287–288, 589–590
specie, 111–113
Wall Street conspiracy, 360–361
See also Federal Reserve System; Gold
standard
Banking Act of 1935, 253–254
Barber, Edward, 3
Barcodes, 333–335, 708
Barger, Brian, 181
Barker, Bernard, 726
Barnes, Harry Elmer, 322

891

Index

Barr, Elmer, 697, 698
Barruel, Abbé Augustin, 87–88, 115–117,
337–338, 512
Barry, Marion, 39
Baruch, Bernard, 624
Bates, Finis L., 130, 438
Bates, Joseph, 651
Baudrillard, Jean, 224
Bauer, Gary, 648
Baum, L. Frank, 141, 590
Bavaria, 335
Bavarian Illuminati. See Illuminati
Bawer, Bruce, 219
Bay Area Revolutionary Committee
(BARC), 733
Bay of Pigs invasion, 152–153, 156, 216,
610
JFK assassination and, 117–119, 394,
677
Watergate and, 117–118, 729
Beach, Henry Lamont “Mike,” 591
Beam, Louis, 119–120, 473, 592
Beard, Charles, 8
Beatles, 188, 426–428, 459
Beaver, Frank, 678
Beckham, Thomas Edward, 690
Beckman, Red, 473
Beecher, Lyman, 66, 413, 530
Beecher, William, 152
Begin, Menachem, 323
Begley, Adam, 219
Behavior modification, 157, 158, 481. See
also Mind control; MK-ULTRA
Belknap, Ray, 683
Bell, Art, 120–121, 198, 704
Bell, Daniel, 86
Bell, John, 688
Bellamy, Pierre, 745
Belli, Melvin, 631
Belmont, August, 506, 816
Ben Laden: La verité interdite (Dasquié),
649
Benjamin, Judah, 82
Bentley, Elizabeth, 70, 159, 191, 326, 713
Benton, Nelson, 246
Benton, Thomas Hart, 112, 252, 287,
358–360
Berardelli, Alessandro, 637, 638
Berg, Alan, 121–122, 167, 633
Berkeley, William, 104
Berkman, Alexander, 62, 63
Berkowitz, David, 610
Berliner, Don, 629
Berlitz, Charles, 584, 628, 703
Bermuda Triangle, 702
Bernard, David, 784
Bernard, Francis, 61
Bernstein, Carl, 571, 730, 744

892

Bernstein, Walter, 256, 493
Bertrand, Clay (Clay Shaw), 392
Besieged Patriot (Smith), 666
Bessie, Alvah, 318
Biberman, Herbert, 318, 320
Biblical prophecies, 10–11, 445, 471,
476–477, 559, 651. See also
Revelation, Book of
Biblical references, 66, 232, 333
Biddle, Nicholas, 112, 114, 122–123, 139,
359–361
Bierce, Ambrose, 204
Bilderbergers, 24, 109, 123–124, 194, 206,
656, 669
aliens and, 704
anti-Bilderbergers, 124
banking and, 109, 124
Clinton and, 124, 255
Committee of 100 and, 541
New World Order and, 123, 124, 469,
536
one-world government and, 433, 559
Bilenchi, Raymond, 594
Bill and Hillary’s Circle of Power, 178
Bill of Rights, 75, 196, 197, 467–468
Billy, William, 512
Bimba, Anthony, 493
Bingham, Jonathan, 543
Bin Laden, Osama, 230
Birth certificates, 333
Birth of a Nation, 6, 256, 439
Bishop, Abraham, 338, 339, 782
Bishop, Bridget, 640
Black, Conrad, 123
Black bag operations, 186, 725
Black Bolsheviks, 614, 616
Black chambers, 241–242
Black helicopters, 124–126, 251, 708, 718
Black Helicopters over America (Keith),
125
Black Liberation Radio, 47
Black Men: Obsolete, Single, Dangerous
(Madhubuti), 45
Black Muslim movement, 247–248, 516
Black Panther Party (BPP), 37, 39, 56, 72,
126–128, 165, 186, 194, 513, 567,
681, 731
FBI and, 249
Black Power, ix, 187, 516, 534
Black Republicans, 28, 137
Black Thursday, 492
“Black Tom” incident, 282
Black Watch troops, 378
Blackbird, 101
Black-lists, 71, 256
Blair, Tony, 124
Blakey, G. Robert, 392–393, 394
Bland-Allison Act of 1878, 287

Blandon, Oscar Danilo, 180, 183
Blanshard, Paul, 67
Blennerhassett, Harman, 146
Bletchley Park, 242
Blickley, George W. L., 201
Body, 39, 47
Body Snatchers (1993), 257
Bodyguards, 178
Boesky, Ivan, 723
Bogdonovich, Peter, 312
Bohemian Grove, 149, 210, 541
Boland Amendments, 350, 351
Bolden, Abraham, 655
Bolshevik Revolution, 62, 68, 119, 189,
253, 637
Bolsheviks, 7, 88, 323, 610, 621
Jews and, 83, 323, 596–597
Bombs, home manufacturing, 683
Bonaparte, Charles, 249
Bonaparte, Napoleon, 145–146
Book and Snake society, 658
Book of Mormon, 4, 508–509
Boone, Pat, 350
Booth, John Wilkes, 128–130, 435,
436–437
diary, 437, 440
Boren, David, 414
Bossism, 616
Boston Gazette, 132
Boston Massacre, 60, 130–131
Boston Port Act, 184
Boston Tea Party, 60, 132–134, 184, 229,
605
Bourne, George, 497
Bourne, Russell, 524
Bowart, Walter, 491
Bowdoin, James, 653
Bowers, Henry Francis, 58, 59
Bowers, Samuel, 420
Bowles, William, 203
Boxley, George, 664
Brackenridge, Henry, 734
Bradford, David, 734
Bradford, William, 522
Bradlee, Benjamin, 730
Bradley, Richard, 755
Bradstreet, Simon, 601
Brady Bill, 334, 468
Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act,
519, 718
The Brain Eaters, 257
“Brain Zapping” (Jeffrey), 879
Brainwashing, 457–458, 481, 485
Branch Davidians, 89–90, 717–719
BATF and, 143, 144, 634
Beam and, 119
Clintons and, 175
McVeigh’s view, 230, 554

Index

NRA’s view, 520
opinion polls, 501
Brazel, William W. “Mac,” 627–628
Bread and Roses strike, 345
Breaking Free, 642
Brennan, Howard, 391
Brenneke, Richard, 547, 549
Brescia, Michael, 556–557
Bresler, Fenton, 427
Bretton-Woods agreement, 205–206, 255
Brian, William, 501
Briguglio, Salvatore, 318
Brill, Steven, 318
Bringham, Amariah, 480
Brisard, Jean-Charles, 649
Britain
French Revolution and, 49–51
Glorious Revolution, 600–601
Panama Canal and, 574
Seven Years’ War, 588
War of 1812 and, 301–302
Zimmerman telegram and, 756–757
British Admiralty, 449
British conspiracy, 2–3, 18
American Revolution, 60–61
Bank of the United States and, 110, 112
Boston Massacre, 130–131
Boston Tea Party, 132–134
Coercive Acts, 184–185
slavery and, 27, 28
U.S. shipping and, 300–301
British East India Company, 132
British Grand Lodge, 274
British Israelism, 167, 655, 667
British Order in Council 6, 134
British Royal Air Force, 199
British royal family, ix, 134–135, 142, 469
LaRouche and, 246, 424
Britton, Nan, 299
Bröckers, Mathias, 650
Broehl, Wayne G., 493
Brooks, James, 214
Brooks, Preston, 661
Broomfield, Nick, 652
Bross, William Deacon, 203
Brotherhood of Destruction, 6
Brotherly Lovers, 46
Brown, Bridget, 21
Brown, Courtney, 120
Brown, David, 54
Brown, J. A., 235
Brown, Joe B., 405, 631–632
Brown, John, 5, 28, 32, 135–137
Brown, Joseph W., 688
Brown, Ron, 175, 178
Brown scare, 137–140
Brownlee, W. C., 530
Bruders Schweigen (Order), 633

Brun, Michael, 382
Brussell, Mae, 140–141, 541, 672, 729
Bryan, C. D. B., 703
Bryan, William Jennings, 82, 141, 252,
288, 506, 589, 590, 801
Brzezinski, Zbigniew, 624, 691, 692
Buchanan, James, 229, 510, 661
Buchanan, Pat, 469, 538, 658, 669, 675
Buck v. Bell, 243
Buckley, William F., 161, 349, 656
Budenz, Louis, 70, 159
Bukovsky, Vladimir, 544
Bull, Stephen, 729
Bull, William, Sr., 679–680
Bullock, Roy, 246
Bunau-Varilla, Philippe, 575
Bunch, James, 177, 178
Bundez, Louis, 326
Bundy, McGeorge, 656, 732
Bundy, William, 656
Buntline, Ned, 436
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms
(BATF), 143–145, 175, 197, 231,
246, 334
Oklahoma City bombing and, 555, 556
Ruby Ridge and, 143, 144, 520, 555,
633–634
Waco and, 520, 717–719
Bureau of Americanization, 532
Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), 56–57, 188
Burgess, Guy, 98
Burgoyne, John, 200
Burk, John Daly, 51, 54
Burke, Aedanus, 28, 668, 771
Burke, Edmund, 60
Burns, Christy, 744–745
Burr, Aaron, 3, 145–147, 368, 430
Burritt, Elijah, 30
Burroughs, William S., 147–149, 216
Bush, Barbara, 658
Bush, George, Sr. (H. W.), 149–150, 372,
520, 655
BNL and, 105
CIA and, 149, 352–353, 428, 483,
609–610
Iran-Contra and, 350, 352–353
LaRouche and, 246
Moonies and, 504
New World Order and, 149, 210, 477,
620–621
October Surprise and, 548, 549
savings and loan crisis and, 643
Skull and Bones Society and, 656, 658
Trilateral Commission and, 692
United Nations and, 708
Bush, George W., 150, 206, 415, 471
mind control and, 482
New World Order and, 536

oil industry and, 552
Pan Am 103 and, 572, 573
September 11 terrorist attacks and,
648–650
Skull and Bones Society and, 656, 658
Bush, Jeb, 644
Bush, Neil, 149, 609, 643, 644
Bush, Prescott, 656
Bush, Vannevar, 489
Butler, Andrew, 661
Butler, Benjamin, 437, 438
Butler, Darelle (Dino), 57
Butler, Richard Girnt, 94–95, 473, 592
Butler, Smedley, 625
Butterfield, Alexander, 726
Butz, Arthur, 322–323
Byrne, Massey, 583
Caesar, Julius, 241
Caesar’s Column (Donnelly), 6, 233–234,
356
Cairncross, John, 98
Caldwell, Earl, 406
Calef, Robert, 741
Calhoun, John C., 114, 358, 362, 545, 660
Callahan, John W., 632
Callender, James Thomson, 51, 135
Calverhall, Randolph D. See Pierce,
William L.
Calvi, Roberto, 246
Cambodia, 156
bombing of, 151–152, 194, 410–412,
500, 541
Cambridge Five, 98, 99
Cameron, Ewen, 484, 486
Cameron, William J., 167, 667
Camp, Gregory S., 89
Camp Douglas uprising, 202–203
Campaign financing, 414–415, 431
Canetti, Elias, 577
Cantrell, George, 203
Cantwell, Alan, 43–44
Canwell, Albert, 612
Capell, Frank, 499
Capitalism, 6, 81, 124, 127, 357, 493
gold and, 285–286
See also Corporations; Trusts
Capitanio, John P., 45
Capone, Al, 143, 343, 451, 452, 632
Capricorn One, 501
Caribbean slave revolts, 30, 664, 665
Carleton, Guy, 606
Carlin, Karen, 631
Carmichael, Stokely, 173, 187, 194
Carnegie, Andrew, 288, 507, 623
Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace, 313, 326, 624
Carnegie Trust, 306

893

Index

Carrington, Henry, 203
Carson, Rachel, 310
Carter, Bunchy, 187
Carter, Chris, 743, 744
Carter, Harlon, 519
Carter, Jimmy, 251, 609
Iranian hostages and, 350, 552
NSA and, 522
October Surprise and, 549
Trilateral Commission and, 691–692
Carto, Willis, 323, 432–433, 535, 586, 618,
669
Caruana, Stephanie, 729
“The Case against the Reds” (Palmer), 806
Case Closed! (Posner), 564, 566, 679
The Case for the UFO (Jessup), 584
Casey, James P., 641
Casey, William, 350, 351, 352
Cash, J. D., 555–556, 557
Casolaro, Danny, 550, 672
Cass, Lewis, 687
Castellon, Francisco, 720
Castro, Fidel, 117, 152–153, 213, 371
CIA plans for, 157, 158, 395, 449, 724
The Catcher in the Rye (Salinger), 426,
427–428
Cathars, 593
Cather, Willa, 282
Catherine the Great, 279
Catholic Church, ix, 6, 80, 85, 641
Albigensian Crusade, 593
Americanization issue, 65–66
Antisemitism and, 209–210
APA and, 58–59
ethnic groups, 4, 63, 66
Freemasons and, 271–272
Glorious Revolution and, 600–601
Illuminati and, 325, 336, 337
Jesuits, 115, 335, 369–371
Knights of Columbus, 67, 417
Ku Klux Klan and, 67, 417–419
Lincoln assassination and, 435, 438, 439
Massachusetts Bay colony and, 369–370
papal plot and Know-Nothings,
412–413
Quebec and, 184, 605–606
secular humanism and, 647–648
See also Anti-Catholicism; Coughlin,
Charles E.; Jesuits
Catholic Power and American Democracy
(Blanshard), 67
Catling, Olivia, 406
Cato Institute, 431
The Cat’s Meow, 312
Cattle mutilations, 125, 153–155, 702–703
Cell 16, 578
Cells, 119, 473
Center for Disease Control (CDC), 38, 43

894

Center for Space Science and Astrophysics
(Stanford), 705
Center on Hate and Extremism, 231
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 24, 72,
107, 117, 149, 155–159, 179, 433
African Americans and, 38, 127
beginning of the CIA and cold war
paranoia, 155–156
behavior modification and, 157, 158,
379
Bilderbergers and, 123
Bush and, 149, 353–353, 428, 483,
609–610
covert operations, 156–157
Cuban missile crisis and, 216
drugs and, 179–184, 237
Iran-Contra and, 349–353
JFK assassination and, 384, 388, 389,
394
King assassination and, 406–407,
408–410
Lennon assassination and, 426
LSD and, 447–449
Malcolm X assassination and, 456
mind control and, 377–379, 485–486
Moonies and, 503
Pan Am 103 and, 572–573
public suspicion of, 157–158
Scaife and, 645
sex slave stories, 483–484, 486–487
UFO reports and, 701–702, 704
Yale University and, 656
See also MK-ULTRA
Centralia Conspiracy, 346
Centre for Research on Globalization, 650
Centrist/extremist theory, 86
Ceppos, Jerry, 183–184
Cermak, Anton, 625
Cesar, Thane Eugene, 398, 400
Chaitkin, Anton, 149, 150, 840
Chalcedon Foundation, 232
Challenger disaster, 502, 503
Chamberlain, Neville, 691
Chambers, Whittaker, 70, 159–162, 191,
313–317, 326, 713, 750
from communist to anticommunist,
159–160
continuing controversy, 160–162
Champion, Richard, 225
Chandler, David Leon, 430–431
Chaos Computer Club, 294
Chaplin, Ralph, 345
Chapman, Mark David, 426–428
Chappaquiddick, 162–165
Chappaquiddick Revealed (Kappel), 164
Chapple, Frank, 544
Charismatic Christians, 232
Charles I, 598, 600

Charles II, 93, 234, 425, 599, 600
Charles IV, 145
Charleston Society, 221
Chase, Samuel, 54
Chemical weapons, 104, 290–291, 561
Chemtrails, 197–199, 309
Cheney, Dick, 539, 552
Cheves, Langdon, 112, 113
Chiang Kai-shek, 749
Chicago riot, 616
Chicago School of Criminology, 244
Chicago 7, 166–167, 186, 188, 655, 731,
752
Chicago Times, 304
Chicago World’s Fair, 59
Chick Publications, 370
Child abuse allegations, 642
Chile, 156, 656
Chiles, Clarence, 700
China, 97, 411–412, 749–750
Chinese Exclusion Act (1882), 96, 236,
529, 532
Chinese immigrants, 96, 179, 236, 532
Chiniquy, Charles, 370, 438, 439, 794
Chlorine pollution, 310
Chomsky, Carol, 538
Chomsky, Noam, 194, 205, 212, 537–538,
730
Chossudovsky, Michel, 650
Christian Coalition, 10, 176, 620, 708
Christian Commonwealth, 654
Christian Defense League, 667
Christian Front, 139, 210
Christian Identity, 119, 167–168, 231, 275,
633, 655, 683
Elohim City, 555–557
Ku Klux Klan and, 420
militias and, 472, 473
neo-Nazis and, 535
New World Order and, 537
Posse Comitatus and, 591
Smith and, 666–667
See also Ruby Ridge
Christianity
focus on personal, 642
humanists and, 647–648
Lindsey and, 445–446
Native American converts, 526–528
Seventh Day Adventists, 651
tent revivals, 479–480
See also Catholic Church
Christian Nationalist Crusade (CNC), 83,
666–667
Christian Nationalist Party (CNP), 666
Christian Patriots Defense League, 683
Christian Reconstructionists, 470, 474
Christian Right, 232, 460, 474, 620, 642,
648, 708

Index

Christian Science, 168–170
Christian Zionist Right, 445–446
Church, William C., 518
Church Committee, 158, 188, 491
Church of England, 331, 598
Church of Jesus Christ Christian, 94
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints. See Mormonism
Church of Scientology, 343–344, 433,
646–647
Church of the Creator, 587
Church of the SubGenius, 170–171
Churchill, Winston, 70, 190, 449, 581
Yalta conference and, 748–750
Church’s Fried Chicken, 38, 39
Cincinnati Revolt, 519
Cincinnati Treason Trials, 203
Cities of the Red Night (Burroughs), 147
Citizen Kane (Welles), 311–313, 751
Citizens Against UFO Secrecy (CAUS),
704
Citizens Commission to Investigate the
FBI, 188
City of Quartz (Davis), 125
Civilian Saucer Investigation Group (CSI),
701
Civil Rights Act of 1866, 438
Civil rights movement, 72, 126, 171–174,
401, 408, 468
FBI and, 171, 173–174, 324, 456
See also COINTELPRO; King, Martin
Luther, Jr.
“Civil Rights Myths and Communist
Realities” (Evans), 172
Civil War, 4–5, 28, 66, 436, 440–441, 464
Antisemitism, 81
Copperheads, 201–203
gold standard and, 287
nullification and, 546
secession, 662
terrorism, 229
Wall Street and, 722
Civil War Times, 440
Clan of the Mystic Confederacy, 174–175
The Clansman (Dixon), 439
Clark, George Rogers, 280–281
Clark, Marc, 188
Clark, Ralph, 275, 276
Clark, William, 428, 431
Clarke, Carter, 713
Clarke, Elijah, 280
Class issues, 357, 438
nativism and, 532
slave revolts, 664
See also Industrial Workers of the
World
Clay, Henry, 28, 76, 114, 122, 276–278,
358–360, 363, 545

Cleaver, Eldridge, 127, 187, 194
Clement XII, 272
Clemmons, Jack, 499
Cleveland, Grover, 506, 710
Clifford, Clark, 107
Clinton, DeWitt, 508
Clinton, George, 280, 668
Clinton, Henry, 93–94
Clinton, Hillary, 175–178, 538
Scaife and, 645–646
Whitewater and, 643, 644–645, 738
Clinton, William Jefferson (Bill), 9,
175–178, 554, 868
Bilderbergers and, 124, 255
Council on Foreign Relations and, 210
Foster and, 89, 176, 178, 267–269, 646,
738
savings and loan crisis and, 643,
644–645
Scaife and, 645–646
tobacco industry and, 686
Trilateral Commission and, 255, 692
Waco bodyguard conspiracy, 144, 175
Whitewater and, 175, 643–645,
737–738
Clinton administration, 89, 649
church taxes and, 343–344
Clinton Body Count, 175–178
“Clinton Body Count” (Ether Zone),
877
Clinton Chronicles, 176, 178
Close Encounters of the Fourth Kind
(Bryan), 703
Clothing companies, 38, 39
“The Cloven Foot Discovered,” 527
Coalition for Revival, 232
Coast Guard, 103
Coast to Coast AM, 120–121
Cobbett, William, 52, 338
Cocaine, 179–184, 248. See also Drugs
“Cocaine, Contras, and the CIA: How
They Introduced Crack into the
Inner City,” 182
Cockburn, Alexander, 538
Codes, 241–243, 580–581, 588, 713–714,
757
Coercive Acts (1773), 60, 133–134,
184–185, 605
Coffin, William Sloane, 656
Cohen, Daniel, 574
Cohen, Susan, 574
Cohen, Theodora, 574
Cohn, Norman, 595
Cohn, Roy, 463
Coin’s Financial School (Harvey), 800
COINTELPRO (Counterintelligence
Program), 72, 128, 173–174,
185–189, 249, 577–578

African Americans and, 187, 404
development of repressive techniques,
185–186
history of abuses, 186–189
Malcolm X and, 456–457
See also Federal Bureau of
Investigation
COINTELPRO—Black Nationalist Hate
Groups, 187
COINTELPRO—New Left, 188
COINTELPRO—White Hate Groups, 187,
420–421, 534
Colbern, Steven, 556
Cold war, 10, 69–70, 189–196, 350
1980s, 72
films, 70, 191
humanism and, 648
JFK assassination and, 395
mind control and, 457–458
National Security Agency and, 521
Reagan and, 542–544
red menace, 191–193
rhetoric of conspiracy, 191–193
Roosevelt and, 8–9, 69
as source of contemporary conspiracy
culture, 194–195
VENONA Project and, 713–714
See also Anticommunism; Communism;
McCarthy, Joseph
Cole, Byron, 720
Cole, Lester, 318, 320
Coleman, J. Walter, 493
Coleman, William T., 641
Coler, Jack, 57
Colfax, Schuyler, 213–214
Collier, James, 501
Collins, Michael, 502–503
Colodny, Len, 729–730
Colombia, Panama Canal and, 574–576
Colombo, Joseph A., Sr., 372
Colorado, mining strikes, 355
Colson, Charles, 583
Coltman, Charles, 362
Columbia University, 188, 423
Columbine killers, 458, 486, 683
Columbus Record, 799
Come Retribution (Tidwell, Hall, and
Gaddy), 440–441
Comintern, 68, 69
Commission G, 199
Commission on CIA Activities within the
United States, 158
Committee of 100, 541
Committee of One Million, 666
Committee on Public Information, 281
Committee on Retrenchment, 358
Committee on Veterans’ Affairs, 855
Committee to Clean up the Courts, 655

895

Index

Committee to Re-Elect the President
(CRP), 725
Committees of Correspondence, 473
Common law traditions, 469–470, 617
Communion (Strieber), 120, 703
Communism, ix, 7, 9, 463, 612, 625, 648
abolitionism and, 27
AIDS and, 43
apocalypticism and, 87–88
civil rights movement and, 171–172
as conspiracy, 69–71
containment, 191, 750
in film, 70, 191, 256–257
fluoridation and, 263–264
as global conspiracy, 373
Hiss, 313–317
Oswald and, 388, 564–565
Panama Canal conspiracy, 575–576
See also Anarchists; Anticommunism;
Chambers, Whittaker; Cold war;
Socialists
Communist America, Must It Be?
(Hargis), 172
Communist Control Act of 1954, 613
Communist Infiltration Program
(COMINFIL), 185
Communist Information Bureau
(COMINFORM), 190
Communist International (Comintern), 68,
69
Communist Manifesto (Marx), 374
Communist Party of the USA (CPUSA),
68–69, 159, 161, 186, 319, 325, 423
Community Memory, 294
Commutation, 667, 668–669
Compact theory, 544–546
Company of Merchants Adventurers, 204
Compromise of 1850, 277, 413, 660
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986,
294
Computers
“denial of service” attacks, 293, 295
hackers, 293–296
Y2K, 747–748
Comstock Lode, 287
Condon, Edward U., 702
Condon, John, 442, 443, 444
Condon, Richard, 191, 457, 554
Condon Report, 702
Conein, Lucein, 238
Conestoga, 526–527
Confederacy, Lincoln assassination and,
435–436, 440–441
Confessions (Turner), 788
Confessions of Nat Turner (Gray), 696
Congregationalists, 80
Congress of Industrial Organizations, 204,
419

896

Congressional Black Caucus Legislative
Conference, 182
Connally, John, 383, 385, 386, 393, 724
Connally, Nellie, 383
Consensus historians, 357
Consensus politics, 71
Considerations on the Society or Order of
Cincinnati (Burke), 771
Conspiracies, real, 97
Conspiracy against the Liberties of the
United States (Morse), 791
The Conspiracy against Silver in the
United States (Farmer), 796
Conspiracy, definition of, 15–17, 204
Conspiracy culture, 22
Conspiracy: How the Paranoid Style
Flourishes and Where It Comes
From (Pipes), 538
Conspiracy Nation, 176
Conspiracy Planet, 198–199
“Conspiracy of Infamy” (McCarthy), 812
The Conspiracy of Pontiac (Parkman), 762
Conspiracy theories, 115, 140, 274, 655
CIA and, 158
Definition of, 15–17
function of, 21–22
since the 1960s, 22
Conspiracy Theory, 17, 260, 577
Conspiracy Theory: Did We Go to the
Moon?, 501
“Conspiracy: Where’s the Proof?” (Jasper),
861
Conspirator, 256
Constantine, Alex, 483, 485, 486, 488
Constitution, 3, 48, 145, 287
anti-Federalists and, 74–75
contemporary conspiracy theories,
196–197
militias and, 144, 467, 468, 470
nullification and, 544
Society of the Cincinnati and, 668–669
The Constitution: Fact or Fiction
(Schroder), 196
Constitution Society, 468
Constitutional Convention of 1787, 74,
300, 659
Constitutional Party, 234
Continental Army, 199–200, 539–541, 667
Continental Congress (1774), 60, 606
Contrails, 197–199, 309
Contras, 349–353, 441, 505, 609
cocaine and, 179–184
The Conversation, 259
Conway, Thomas, 200
Conway cabal, 92, 199–201
Conyers, John, 182
Cooke, Jay, 722
Cooper, Bill, 46

Cooper, Milton William, 703
Cooper, William, 469
Coors, Joseph, 350, 645
Copeland, David, 691
Copperheads, 201–203, 436
Cora, Charles, 641
Corbeth, Alan, 120
Corbett, Boston, 128
Cornelius, John, 757
Cornell, Julien, 594
Corporations, 38, 39, 203–207, 538–539.
See also Capitalism
Corso, Gregory, 147
Corso, Philip, 628
Cosby, William, 755
Cotton, John, 330–331
Coughlin, Charles E., 8, 83, 109, 139,
207–210, 666
Coulson, Danny O., 718
Council for Tobacco Research, 685
Council on Foreign Relations (CFR), 10,
206, 210–212, 621, 656
Bilderbergers and, 124
Bush Sr. and, 149, 210
Federal Reserve System and, 253, 255,
288
militia views, 168, 469
New World Order and, 211, 536
one-world government and, 210, 559
Rockefellers and, 623, 624
Counter Spy Magazine, 212
Counterculture, 148, 194, 491
Counterintelligence Program. See
COINTELPRO

“Counterintelligence Program, Black
Nationalist–Hate Groups” (Hoover),
825
Courier and Enquirer, 359
Covenant, Sword, and Arm of the Lord,
683, 684
Covert Action Information Bulletin
(CAIB), 212
Covert Action Quarterly (CAQ), 45,
212–213
Cox, Archibald, 726–727
Cox, Samuel “Sunset,” 201
“CPUSA—Counterintelligence Program”
(Belmont), 816
Cranston, Alan, 644
Crash (Ballard), 216
The Crash—The Coming Financial
Collapse of America, 89
Crash at Corona (Friedman and Berliner),
629
Crawford, William H., 358, 687
Creation/evolution debate, 142
Credit cards, 709
Crédit Mobilier Scandal, 213–214

Index

Creelman, James, 751
The Crimes of a President (Bainerman),
175
Crimes of the Future, 215
Criminality, study of, 244
Crisman, Fred, 690
Cromwell, William Nelson, 575
Cronenberg, David, 148, 214–216
Crosley, George. See Chambers, Whittaker
Cross and Flag, 666
“Cross of Gold Speech” (Bryan), 801
Crossfire: The Plot That Killed Kennedy
(Marrs), 676
Crowds and Power (Canetti), 577
The Crucible (Miller), 741
Crucini, Mario, 675
The Crying of Lot 49 (Pynchon), 602–603
Cryptonym, 466
Cuba, 72, 152–153, 193
anti-Castro exiles, 152–153, 567
JFK assassination and, 384, 395–396,
632
Ostend Manifesto, 660–661
Oswald and, 72, 389–390, 567
USS Maine and, 709–712
See also Bay of Pigs invasion
Cuban missile crisis, 117, 153, 193,
216–217, 395
Cults, 377, 504
satanic, 153–155, 703
See also Moonies; Satanic ritual abuse;
Scientology
Culture wars, 89, 647
Cumbey, Constance, 621
Cummings, Elijah, 182
Cunningham, Hugh, 656
The Curious Death of Marilyn Monroe
(Slatzer), 499
Curran, Charles, 67
Currency Act of 1764, 671
Currie, Lauchlin, 326
Cutler, Robert, 163, 490
Cyberculture Conspiracy, 673
Czarist secret police, 8, 83, 88
Czolgosz, Leon, 311–312, 564
Dahlgren, Ulric, 440
Daily Telegraph, 198
Daily Worker, 159, 326
Daisy chains, 644
Daley, Richard, 752
Dallas, Alexander, 112
Dallas Morning News, 630–631
Dallas Police Department, 567, 632
Dalrymple, John, 134
Daly, Mary, 578
Dames, Ed, 120
Damore, Leo, 163–164

Dan Smoot Report, 373
Danforth, John C., 144, 717, 718
Daniel, Charles T., 203
Daniels, Thomas, 656
Dannemeyer, William, 177
Darby, John Nelson, 476–477
“Dark Alliance,” 179, 180, 181–184
Dark City, 261–262
Dark lantern societies, 436
Dark Skies, 121, 257, 488
Darkside theories, 704
DARPA. See Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency
Darrow, Clarence, 142
Dasquié, Guillaume, 649
Daugherty, Harry, 297
Davies, Carl A., 573
Davies, Marion, 312
Davis, Angela, 185
Davis, David Brion, 115, 357
Davis, Jefferson, 435, 437
Davis, Kathie, 703
Davis, Mike, 125
Davis, Richard Harding, 750–751
Davis, William C., 440
Davison, Henry P., 253
The Day after Roswell (Corso), 628
The Day the Earth Stood Still, 700
Days of Rage, 731
De Mohrenschildt, George, 393, 395
The Dead Zone, 215–216
Dean, Jodi, 22
Dean, John, 353, 434, 730
Dean, John, III, 726
Dean, Maureen, 730
Deane, Silas, 200
Dearborn Independent. See Protocols of
the Elders of Zion
Debs, Eugene V., 345
“A Declaration and Remonstrance . . .”
(Smith and Gibson), 764
Declaration of Independence, 2–3, 18, 28,
226, 770
Declaration of Rights and Grievances
(1774), 60, 185
DeConcini, Dennis, 644
DeCurtis, Anthony, 219
Deep politics, 396, 541, 567
Deep Throat, 730
Dees, Morris, 121, 473
Defenders of the Christian Faith, 83
Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA), 198, 347
Defense Department, 44, 100, 704
Defense Industrial Security Command
(DISC), 690
Defense Language Institute, 388
Degan, William, 632, 634

Delancey, Justice, 755, 756
Delgado, José, 487–488
DeLillo, Don, 118, 219–220, 568
DeMar, Gary, 232
Democratic National Convention
1968, 165, 681, 731, 752
1972, 753
1992, 175
Democratic Party, 27, 141, 287, 413, 416,
424, 436, 531
Copperheads, 201–203
Democratic Republicans, 338, 367, 368
Democratic Society of the City of New
York, 221
Democratic-Republican Societies,
220–222, 511, 512
Deniau, Jean-Charles, 547
Dennis, Lawrence, 9
Dennison, Tom, 616
Depatterning, 448
DePugh, Robert, 707
DeSoto Missions, 689
Detection of a Conspiracy (Cobbett), 52
Deterring Democracy (Chomsky), 537
Detroit Sunday Journal, 317
Deutch, John, 182, 183
Devil’s Dictionary (Bierce), 204
Dewees, Franklin P., 493
Dewey, John, 67, 647
Dewey, Thomas, 452
DeWitt, John L., 366
DeWitt, Katherine, 164
Dialogue aux enfers entre Montesquieu et
Machiavel (Joly), 321, 595
Diana, Princess, 9, 246
Dianchi, Donna, 519
Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental
Health (Hubbard), 647
Diaz, Oviodio, 575
Dick, Philip K., 222–224
Dickinson, John, 60
Dickstein, Samuel, 138, 325
Diderot, Denis, 115
Dies, Martin, 325
Dies Committee, 666
Diffie, Whitefield, 242
Digital Angel, 334, 488
Dilling, Elizabeth, 9
Dioxin, 41–42
Disbelief, strategies of, 47
Disunion, fears of, 224–226
Divine Principle (Moon), 503
Dixiecrats, 171
Dixon, Julian, 182
Dixon, Thomas, Jr., 439
Dmytryk, Edward, 318, 319–321
DNA, 318
aliens and, 703, 704

897

Index

Dobbs, J. R. “Bob,” 170
Dobson, James, 648
Doctorow, E. L., 618
Docudramas, 629, 630. See also JFK
Dodd, Harrison, 201, 203
Doe v. Bolton, 33
Dohrn, Bernardine, 731
Dole, Bob, 414, 542
Dollar bill, 226–227
Domestic terrorism. See Terrorism
Dominion theology, 232–233
Donnelley, Ignatius, 6, 233–234, 356, 590
Doolittle Committee, 815
Doomsday scenarios, 90
Dornberger, Walter, 691
Dorr, Thomas Wilson, 235
Dorr War, 234–236
Double Cross: The Explosive, Inside Story
of the Mobster Who Controlled
America (Giancana), 499
Douglas, C. H., 593
Douglas, Stephen, 661, 662
Douglass, Frederick, 32, 136
Douglass, William C., 43
Dow Jones Industrial average, 722, 723
Downing, Jack, 111
The Downing of Flight 800 (Sanders),
696–697
Doyle, Arthur Conan, 493
Dr. Strangelove, 264
Draft resistance, 289–290
Drayton, William Henry, 27
Dreamland, 120
“Dreamland” (Data Repository and
Electronic Amassing Management),
91
Dred Scott decision, 5, 661
Drew, Daniel, 214
Drexel, Anthony J., 506
Drivers licenses, 333–334
Drudge, Matt, 175
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA),
125, 144, 237, 258
Drugs, 236–239, 246
cocaine, 179–184
as conspiracy against African
Americans, 39–40, 454–455, 513,
561–562, 577
Harlem Drug Lords, 454–455
mind control and, 481, 491
opiates, 236–238
Drugstore Conspiracy, 142
Drummond, Philo, 170
DSC1000, 348
Du Maurier, George, 484
Duane, William, 51, 52, 54
Duchovny, David, 743
Duesberg, Peter, 44, 46

898

Dugdale, Richard, 244
Dukakis, Michael, 246
Duke, David, 535, 669
Duke, Phillip S., 46
Duke’s Laws, 425
Dulles, Allen, 490
Dulles, John Foster, 191
Dun and Bradstreet, 286
Dunham, Charles, 437
DuPont, 238–239
Dupuy de Lôme, 710
Durham, Martin, 473
Dwight, Theodore, Jr., 368, 497
Dwight, Timothy, 272, 338–339, 511, 746
Dworkin, Andrea, 578
Dwyer, Richard, 378
Dye, John Smith, 660, 796
Dyer, Leonidas C., 614
Dyer, Mary, 599
Dyer Act, 249
Dynamic silence, 666
East India Company, 204
East-Coast establishment, 211
Eastern elite, 551, 617. See also Council
on Foreign Relations; Skull and
Bones Society; Trilateral
Commission
Eastern Europe, 749–750
Eastman, Elaine Goodale, 284
Eaton, George, 472
Eban, Abba, 376
Ebeling, Christoph, 512
ECHELON, 212, 243, 348
Economic crises
panic of 1819, 113, 122, 357, 359
panic of 1837, 110, 357
panic of 1893, 590
panic of 1907, 506–507
Shays’ Rebellion, 652–653
Economic Education Trust (EET), 415
Economic plots, 6, 8, 81
stock market crash of 1929, 673–675
Ecoterrorism, 229–230
Eddowes, Michael, 395
Eddy, Mary Baker, 168–170
Edgartown, Massachusetts, 162
Educational curricula, 648
Edwards, E. L., 419
Edwards, Jonathan, 1, 476
Edwards, Jonathan, Jr., 145
Edwards, Jonathan, Sr., 145
Egypt, 551
Ehrlichman, John, 168, 434, 583, 726
Eichengreen, Barry, 674
Eighth Army Air Force, 628
Eilberg, Joshua, 561
Einstein, Albert, 584

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 10, 205, 462, 750
aliens and, 489, 704
communism and, 70, 71, 190, 191, 462,
750
Cuba and, 117–118, 152–153
John Birch society and, 373
U-2 plane crash and, 521
Eisenschiml, Otto, 439
Eisenschiml Thesis, 439, 440
El Indio, 489
Elector of Bavaria, 622
Electoral College, 358, 368
Electromagnetic low-frequency radiation
(ELF), 488
Electronic Frontier Foundation, 334
Electronic Privacy Information Center,
334
Elites, 20, 211, 551, 617, 681
Elizabeth I, 135, 369
Elizabeth II, 246
Ellsberg, Daniel, 412, 434, 582–583, 725
Elohim City, 555–557
Ely, Samuel, 653
Emancipation Proclamation, 201, 278, 662
Embro, Stephen, 4–5
Emerging Viruses: AIDS and Ebola—
Nature, Accident, or Intentional?
(Horowitz), 46
Emory, Dave, 175
The Emperor Wears No Clothes (Herer),
238
Empire (Hardt and Negri), 124
Empiricism, 481–482
Encryption, 241–243. See also Codes
End Times. See Millenarianism
Endocrine disrupter thesis, 310
Enemy of the State, 243, 260
“The Enemy Within” (Vidal), 539, 650
Engel, George, 304, 305
Engelberg, Hyman, 499
The Engineer Corps of Hell (Sherman),
370
English only movement, 533
Enigma code, 242
Enlightenment, 73, 80, 87, 115–116, 272,
335, 741
Enron scandal, 551, 650
Entrapment, 634
Environmental issues, 229–230, 309–310,
537, 538–539
fluoridation, 265
militias and, 474, 513
Environmental Protection Agency, 307,
310
Epidemic of signification, 47
Episcopalians, 80
Epstein, Brian, 427
Epstein, Edward, 565

Index

Erie, Lake, 687
Escape and Suicide of John Wilkes Booth
(Bates), 130, 438
Espinosa, Rafael, 719
Espionage Act, 139
Ether Zone, 877
Ethics, 205
Ethylene dibromide, 198
Eugenics, 243–245, 487
European armies, 522–523
European Group, 691
European Union, 446, 559
Evans, Hiram, 417, 419
Evans, Sam, 406
Evans-Pritchard, Ambrose, 176
Everest, Wesley, 346
Evolution, 142
Ewing, Oscar, 264–265
Ex parte Milligan, 203
Exclusion Act (1924), 97
ExComm, 216–217
The Executioner’s Song (Mailer), 454, 568
Executive Intelligence Review, 245–246,
424, 547
Executive Order 9066, 9, 366
Exegesis (Dick), 223
Exile, 130
EXistenZ, 215
The Exorcist, 642
The Faculty, 257
Fadeley, Kenneth, 633
Fahey, Dennis, 209
Fair Deal, 159
Fair Play for Cuba Committee (FPCC),
72, 389–390, 567
Fairness and Accuracy in Media, 505
“Fake Terror: The Road to Dictatorship”
(Rivero), 864
Fall, Albert, 297
False memory syndrome, 642
Falwell, Jerry, 11, 176, 178, 445, 544
Family, the, 459–460
Fard, Wallace (Wali Farad Muhammad),
516
“Farewell Address” (Washington), 774
Farmer, E. J., 796
Farrakhan, Louis, 37, 112, 247–248, 457,
515, 518
Fascism, 69, 137, 356, 468, 473
Pound and, 593, 594
Fauchet, Jean, 280
Fauntroy, Walter, 409
Faurisson, Robert, 322
The Fearmakers, 256
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 9,
144, 248–250, 324–325
1993 WTC attack and, 230

African Americans and, 38–39,
127–128, 171, 187, 404
AIM and, 55–57
anticommunism, 72, 248–249, 324
brown scare and, 139
“FBI files,” 249–250
IRA and, 354
JFK assassination and, 384, 388,
389–390, 690, 723–724
King assassination and, 403–404,
408–410
Ku Klux Klan and, 420–421
Malcolm X assassination and, 456–457
Martin Luther King and, 376
organized crime targets, 249
Oswald and, 388, 389–390, 394–395
Project MEGIDDO, 468
Roswell and, 628
Ruby Ridge and, 634
Uptick operation, 452
view of Turner Diaries, 585
Waco and, 718–719
Watergate and, 152
See also COINTELPRO
Federal Bureau of Narcotics (FBN),
236–237, 239, 491
Federal Communications Commission
(FCC), 374, 485, 682
Federal Convention, 196, 668
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
(FDIC), 643
Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), 194, 250–252, 471, 537,
554, 747
Federal Enforcement Acts, 417
“The Federal Reserve” (Traficant), 861
The Federal Reserve: A Corrupt System
(McFadden), 808
Federal Reserve Act, 253–254
Federal Reserve Board, 106, 141–142
Federal Reserve System, 85, 88, 107, 168,
252–255, 669
Bank of England and, 108–109
J. P. Morgan and, 505, 507
stock market crash of 1929 and, 673,
674, 675
Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
Corporation (FSLIC), 643
Federalism, nullification and, 544–546
Federalist Papers, 73, 545
Federalists, 3, 49–50, 51, 52, 73, 134, 145,
221, 659
anti-Masonry, 272
Burr and, 146
domestic security program, 53–55
fears of disunion and, 225
Hartford Convention and, 300–302
Illuminati and, 337, 338, 339

Morse and, 511
newspapers, 367–368
nullification and, 545
Shays’ Rebellion and, 653
Society of the Cincinnati and, 668
view of Jefferson, 367–368
Whiskey Rebellion and, 733–735
XYZ affair and, 745–746
See also Anti-Federalists
Federation of American Scientists, 101
Felsenstein, Lee, 294
The Feminine Mystique (Friedan), 578
Feminism, 33–34, 187–188, 578–579,
741
The Feminists, 578
Fenno, John, 50, 221
Fenster, Mark, 22, 260, 470, 474
Ferlinghetti, Lawrence, 147
Fernandez, Andrew, 466
Ferrell, Robert, 299
Ferrie, David, 389–390, 392, 458, 677,
678, 691
Fhima, Lameen “The Egg,” 572, 574
Fiedler, Leslie, 161
Fielden, Samuel, 304, 305
Fiers, Alan, 353
Fifth column, 9, 137, 138, 139, 366
Fifty Years in the Church of Rome
(Chiniquy), 370, 438, 794
Fight Club, 260
Filibusters, 719–721
Fillmore, Millard, 413
Film and conspiracy theory, 22, 23, 148,
255–263, 577, 678–679
alien invasions and body snatchers, 257,
700, 701
antiestablishment conspiracies, 260–261
based on Dick’s novels, 222–224
cold war and international communist
conspiracy, 70, 191, 256–257
conspiracies of infinite regress, 261
contemporary period, 259–260
Cronenberg, 214–216
epidemics, medical experiments, and
the unexplainable, 261
freedom versus security, 262
governmental, corporate, and police
conspiracies, 204, 258
obscurity and inscrutability, 260
Pakula, 571
post-Vietnam, post-Watergate era,
257–258
pro-Soviet films, 319
right-wing films, 43, 89, 177–178,
647
science fiction and horror, 484
Watergate, 257, 571
See also Hollywood; Zapruder film

899

Index

Final Report of the Independent Counsel
for Iran/Contra Matters (Walsh), 856
Final Warning: A History of the New
World Order (Rivera), 866
Fire Scare of 1825–1826, 5
First Alabama Cavalry Regiment
(Constitutional Militia), 556
First Continental Congress, 185
Fisch, Isidore, 444
Fish, Hamilton, 138
Fish, Hamilton, Jr., 434
Fisher, Adolph, 304, 305
Fisher, Jack, 449
Fisk, Jim, 214
Fiske, John, 47
Fiske, Robert, 178, 645
Fiske, Robert F., Jr., 738
Fitzsimmons, Frank, 317
Five Percent philosophy, 608
Flagler, Henry, 623
Flechsig, Paul Emil, 576
Flemming, Brian, 466
Flight 77, 649
Flight 93, 472
Floyd, John, 30
Fluoridation, 263–265, 469, 488
Flying Saucers (Menzel), 701
Flying Saucers from Outer Space
(Keyhoe), 701
Flying Saucers Have Landed (Adamski),
701
“The Flying Saucers Are Real” (Keyhoe),
700, 701
Flynn, Elizabeth Gurley “Rebel Girl,” 345
Flynt, Larry, 141, 318
Folger, Abigail, 459
Fonzi, Gaeton, 396
Foo fighters, 699
Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
307
Food industry, 265, 308, 310
Forbes, Charles, 297
Ford, Gerald, 157, 366, 410, 460, 677, 702
Ford, Henry, 7–8, 83, 167, 265–267, 322,
559, 596, 666, 667
Ford Motor Company School, 532
Foreign Affairs, 211
Foreign Agricultural Service, 105
A Foreign Conspiracy against the
Liberties in the United States
(Morse), 530
Foreign Service, 90
Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act,
574
Forrestal, James, 489, 704
Forsberg, Randall, 543
Forsyth, James, 285
Forsyth, John, 31

900

Fort, Charles, 223
Fort Detrick, 42, 43
Fort Mims massacre, 528
Fort Sumter, 201
Fortier, Michael, 553, 556
Foster, Gaines, 130
Foster, Jodie, 609
Foster, Vince, 89, 176, 178, 267–269, 646,
738
414 Gang, 294
Fourteen-Part Message, 580
Foy, Mordecai, 362
France, 2, 49–50
Genet and, 49, 221, 279–281, 512, 735
Louisiana Territory and, 145–146
XYZ affair and, 745–746
See also French Revolution; Seven
Years’ War
Franco-American treaty (1778), 280
Franklin, Benjamin, 75, 226, 470, 527
Frankos, Donald, 317
“Free Company,” 313
Free Press, 619
Free press theory, 53
Freedmen’s Bureau Act, 438
Freedom Fighter Net, 472
Freedom Leadership Foundation (FLF),
503, 504
Freedom Networker, 853
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), 72,
188, 316, 408, 409, 440, 456, 630,
704
Freedom’s Journal, 29
Freeh, Louis, 705
Freemasonry, ix, 3, 85, 214, 269–275, 746
accusations in the eighteenth century,
271–273
in America, 272–273
apocalypticism, 87–88
assassinations and, 75, 76, 507–508
dollar bill and, 226–227
French Revolution and, 76, 87,
115–116, 272, 337
historical origins, 271
Illuminati and, 80, 335–337, 622
“Illuminized” Masonry, 272–273
Jews and, 116, 124
New World Order and, 274
William Morgan and, 507–508
See also Anti-Masonic movement;
Illuminati
Freemen, 275–276, 591
Free-Soilers, 28, 136
Free-State raiders, 136
Fremont, John C., 32, 465
French, Gordon, 294
French and Indian War, 476, 526
French National Assembly, 116

French Panama Canal Company, 574–575
French Revolution, 221, 229, 279, 433,
714
Antisemitism and, 80–81
Britain and, 49–51
Freemasons and, 76, 87, 115–116, 272,
337
Illuminati and, 3, 52, 76, 115–116,
336–337, 622, 746
Jefferson and, 367–368
Morse and, 511, 512
See also France
Freneau, Philip, 51, 220–221, 297
Freud, Sigmund, 484, 576
Frick, Henry Clay, 62
Friedan, Betty, 188, 578
Friedkin, William, 642
Friedman, Milton, 674
Friedman, Stanton, 489, 490, 629
Friends of Democracy, 139
Friends of the New Germany, 138
Fries’ Rebellion, 617
Fritz, J. Will, 567–568
From the Drain, 215
Fromme, Lynett “Red” “Squeaky,” 460
Frontline, 573
The Front, 256
Frykowski, Voiytek, 459
Fuchs, Klaus, 98, 99, 713
Fugitive Slave Act (1850), 136, 276–278
Fugitive Slave Law (1793), 276, 277, 660,
661
Fukuyama, Francis, 536
Fuller, John, 703
Fundamentalism, 83–84, 88–89, 426,
482
civil rights movement and, 171, 172
A Funny Thing Happened on the Way
to the Moon (Sibrel), 501
Fusion paranoia, 24, 467
El-Gabrowny, Ibrahim, 372–373
Gaddafi, Muammar el, 649
Gaddy, David, 440–441
Gag rule, 4, 659
Galbraith, John Kenneth, 673
Gale, William Porter, 591
Gallagher, Michael, 210
Gallatin, Albert, 746
Galt, Eric St. Vincent, 406–407
Galton, Francis, 243
The Game Players of Titan (Dick), 222
Gangs, 469
Garcia, Jerry, 491
Gargan, Joseph, 163
Garn-St. Germain Act (1982), 643–644
Garrison, Jim, 157–158, 392, 396, 565,
675–679, 690

Index

Garrison, William Lloyd, 3, 29, 30, 696
Garvey, Marcus, 37, 516
Gary, Elbert H., 507
Gary, Joseph E., 304
Gates, Bill, 294, 466
Gates, Daryl, 400
Gates, Horatio, 92, 199, 200, 540
Gay community, 42, 46
Gazette of the United States, 50–51, 221,
367–368
Gemini program, 501
GEMSTONE, Operation, 434, 541, 725
Gemstone File, 558
General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs
(GATT), 469, 537
Genet, Cornelia, 280
Genet, Edmond Charles, 49, 221,
279–281, 512, 735
Genocide, 47, 213, 424, 468, 652
AIDS as, 40, 44, 45–46
Gentlemen’s Agreement of 1907–1908,
532
George, David, 128, 130
George, Henry, 341
George II, 297
George III, 3, 60, 61, 94, 134, 184, 301,
470
George Bush: The Unauthorized
Biography (Tarpley and Chaitkin),
840
German agitators, red summer of 1919
and, 614–616
German Americans, 138, 281–282, 532
German Parliament, 554
Germany, 6, 533–534, 756–757
Gerry, Elbridge, 745, 746
Gerson, Allan, 574
Gersten, Peter A., 704
Gerth, Jeff, 541
Gervase, Thomas, 369
Gettlin, Robert, 729–730
Ghorbanifar, Manucher, 351
Ghost Dance religion, 6, 282–285
Ghost Dance War, 284–285
Ghost of Chance (Burroughs), 148
Ghosts on the Roof (Chambers), 160
Giacalone, Anthony, 317
Giancana, Chuck, 499
Giancana, Sam, 393, 499
Gibson, James, 764
Giddens, Anthony, 748
Giddings, Joshua, 658
Gilbert, David, 45
Gilmer, Harry, 304
Gilmore, Gary, 454
Gimme Some Truth: The John Lennon FBI
File (Wiener), 426
Ginsberg, Allen, 147

Girard, Stephen, 112
Girondin faction, 279
Gitlow, Benjamin, 159
Giuliani, Rudolph, 452
Glass, Carter, 253
Glass-Steagall Banking Act, 722
Glenn, John, 644
Globalization, 21, 23, 124, 206, 210, 260,
308
Protocols of the Elders of Zion and,
595–596
Seattle protests, 538–539
“Globalization and Secret Societies
Exposed” (Ross), 883
Globe, 400
Glorious Revolution, 363, 425, 600
Gnadenhutten massacre, 527
Goddard, Henry, 244–245
Goddard, Ian Williams, 697
The Godfather films, 452–453
Godwin, William, 367
Gold, Harry, 98, 99
“Gold Corner” of 1869, 214
Gold standard, 285–289, 506
Bank of England and, 108–109, 286
Bryan and, 141–142, 288, 589
Federal Reserve System and, 252,
254–255
Populist Party and, 589–590
Sherman Silver Purchase Act and,
287–288, 506, 590
stock market crash and, 673–674
See also Banking
Goldman, Albert, 427
Goldman, Emma, 62, 63, 611
Goldstein, Naomi, 428
Goldwater, Barry, 374, 432, 582, 645
Gollin, James, 381–382
Golos, Jacob, 326
Gonzalez, George, 268
Gonzalez, Henry, 105, 106
Gonzalez, Virgilio, 726
Good, Sarah, 639, 740
Goode, Wilson W., 514
Goodwin, Richard, 117
GOONs (Gunfighters of the Oglala
Nation), 56–57
Gordon, Thomas, 133
Gore, Al, 415, 482
Gorham, Nathaniel, 224, 225
Gosper, Bill, 293
Gottlieb, Sidney, 157, 448, 484, 486, 490,
491
Gouge, William, 113, 252,790
Gould, Jay, 214
Gouzenko, Igor, 98, 326
Gow, Betty, 442
Gowen, Franklin B., 492, 493, 494–495

Grabbe, J. Orlin, 109, 288, 555
Graham, Allison, 744
Graham, Bob, 650
Grand Sedition Trial (1944), 666
Granddad’s Wonderful Book of Chemistry
(Saxon), 683
Grange organizations, 589
Grant, Ulysses S., 81–82, 214, 436,
439–440
Gravel, Mike, 582
Gravity’s Rainbow (Pynchon), 603
Gray, T. R., 695–696
Gray alliance, 567
The Great Conspiracy to Overthrow
Liberty in America (Dye), 796
The Great Controversy (White), 370
The Great Crash (Galbraith), 673
The Great Cryptogram (Donnelly), 233
Great Depression, 8, 83, 110, 207, 254,
311, 624, 643, 674, 722
The Great in the Small; Antichrist
Considered as an Imminent Political
Possibility (Nilus), 596
Great Seal of the United States, 226–227,
272
Great White Slavery Scare of 1907–1914,
735–736
Greeley, Horace, 480, 531
Green Berets, 378, 633
Green Corn Rebellion, 289–290
“Green Mountain Boys” movement, 617
Green revolution, 307
Greenbacks, 287
Greenblatt, Richard, 293
Greenglass, Ruth, 99
Greenson, Ralph, 498, 499
Grenada, 350
Grenville, George, 61, 132, 670–671
Griffith, D. W., 439
Griggs, William, 640
Griner, Priscilla, 429–430
Griner, Robert, 430
Gritz, James “Bo,” 181, 469, 473, 634
Guatemala, 117, 156
Guevara, Che, 117, 156–157, 681
Guidelines (MOVE), 513
Guild Socialism, 593
Guild system, 271
Gulf of Tonkin incident, 231
Gulf War, 105, 107, 149, 536, 551, 552,
572, 708
Gulf War Syndrome (GWS), 290–291, 561
Gun activists, 334, 467–468, 518–520
Gun Control Act (1968), 143, 519
Gun Owners of America, 143, 473
Gunpowder Plot, 65
Guyana, 377–379
Guzman, Jacobo Arbenz, 156

901

Index

H. Rap Brown Act, 165
HAARP project, 198, 488
Habeas corpus, 660
Haber, Al, 680
Hackers, 293–296
Haco, Don, 436
El-Hage, Wadi, 373
The Hague, 707
Hahn, Otto, 98
Haig, Alexander, 412, 728
Haight-Asbury, 459
Haitian slave revolts, 27, 664, 665
Hal Lindsey Oracle, 445
Haldeman, H. R. (Bob), 168, 542, 583,
726, 728–729
Hale, David, 738
Hale-Bopp comet, 120
Hall, David D., 739
Hall, Fawn, 352
Hall, James, 440–441
Hall, Theodore A. (Ted), 99
Halperin, Maurice, 326
Halperin, Morton, 152
Halt the Arms Race (Forsberg), 543
Hamas, 597
Hamilton, Alexander, 134, 145, 224,
296–297, 300, 769
Alien and Sedition Acts and, 49, 50–51
British royal family and, 134
Burr and, 145, 147
Newburgh conspiracy and, 539–541
Whiskey Rebellion and, 733, 734
XYZ affair and, 745
Hamilton, Andrew, 755–756
Hamilton, Charles V., 173
Hamilton, James, 715
Hamm, Mark S., 556
Hampton, Fred, 128, 186, 187–188
Hanchett, William, 437
Harding, Florence, 297–299
Harding, Warren G., 297–300, 343, 417
Hardt, Michael, 124
Hargis, Billy James, 172
Hargrove, Thomas, 561, 563
Harison, Francis, 755
Harlem Drug Lords, 454–455
Harlot’s Ghost (Mailer), 454
Harman, Jane, 182
Harper, James, 531
Harper, Robert Goodloe, 746
Harper’s Ferry, 5, 32
Harper’s Weekly, 66
Harriman, Averell, 656
Harriman, E. H., 243
Harris, Charles Coffin, 302
Harris, Eric, 458, 486
Harris, Kevin, 634
Harris, William, 687

902

Harrison, Benjamin, 284
Harrison, William Henry, 660
Hartford Connecticut witchcraft trial, 740
Hartford Convention, 225, 300–302
Harvey, William “Coin,” 590, 800
“Has the Lincoln Theme Been
Exhausted?” (Randall), 439
Hate Bus, 534
Hauptmann, Anna, 444
Hauptmann, Bruno Richard, 441–445
Haut, Walter G., 628
Hauteval, Lucien, 745
Hawaii, 96, 302–304. See also Pearl
Harbor
Hawley-Smoot Tariff, 722
Hay, John, 575
Al-Hayat Al-Jadeeda, 597
Hayden, Tom, 165, 166, 194, 538–539, 680
Hayer, Talmadge, 454, 455–456
Hayes, Arthur, 405
Haymarket bombing, 6, 62, 304–306, 731,
732
Haywood, William “Big Bill,” 345–346
Health scares, 306–311, 469
environmental dangers, 309–310
fact-based theories, 307–308
food scares, 265, 308, 310
fraud and addiction, 308
Great Flue pandemic, 306
health-related agencies and centers,
307
scientific medicine, 306
transgressive science, 308–309
Hearings and Exhibits of the Warren
Commission, 566
Hearst, Patty, 229
Hearst, William Randolph, 229, 239,
311–313, 364, 750–752
Citizen Kane and, 312–313
Hearst Publications, 311, 443, 710, 711
Heaven’s Gate mass suicide, 90, 120
Hedrick, Benjamin Sherwood, 32
Hefner, Hugh, 423
Heilbrunn, Jacob, 621
Helicopters. See Black helicopters
Helmer, Robert, 882
Helms, Richard, 490, 491
“Helter Skelter” (Beatles), 459
Hemingway, Ernest, 594
Hemp industry, 239
Henry, Patrick, 73, 74, 196
Herbeck, Dan, 553
Herek, Gregory M., 45
Herer, Jack, 238
Heritage Foundation, 161, 645, 648
Hermeneutics of suspicion, 224
Herodotus, 241
Heroes of the Fiery Cross (White), 806

Herold, Davey, 437
Herrick, John, 690
Hersey, John, 656
Hersh, Seymour, 381
Heston, Charlton, 519
Hezbollah, 586
Hicks, Granville, 161
Hicks, John D., 589
Hickson, Charles, 703
The Hidden Dangers of the Rainbow
(Cumbey), 621
The Hidden Persuaders (Packard), 485,
682
Hieroglyphics, 241
Higginson, Thomas Wentworth, 136
High Frequency Active Auroral Research
Project (HAARP), 198, 488
High school shootings, 469
Higham, John, 438
Highway Department, 537
Hill, Barney, 703
Hill, Betty, 703
Hill, George, 138
Hill, Greg, 340
Hill, James J., 214
Hill, Joe, 346
Hill, John, 685
Himanen, Pekka, 239
Himes, Joshua V., 478–480
Hinckley, Jack, 609
Hinckley, John, Jr., 149, 427–428, 486, 609
Hinman, Gary, 460
Hiss, Alger, 70, 159–161, 313–317, 326,
541, 627, 748, 750
Panama Canal and, 575–576
Hiss, Priscilla, 315
“Historic Diary” (Oswald), 816
Historical revisionism, 420, 433, 438–439.
See also Holocaust denial
History of the Conspiracy of Pontiac
(Parkman), 588
Hitchens, Christopher, 547
Hitler, Adolf, 8, 209, 213, 244, 267, 535,
626, 722
Hitz, Fredrick, 182
Hoagland, Richard C., 120
The Hoax of the Twentieth Century (Butz),
322–323
Hobart College, 188
Hochmuth, Amandus, 444
Hoffa, Jimmy, 317–318, 394, 452, 454
Hoffman, Abbie, 165, 166, 752–753
Hoffman, Anita, 752
Hoffman, David, 231
Hoffman, Harold, 444
Hoffman, Julius, 165, 167
Hofstadter, Richard, ix, 19, 71, 85–86, 234,
357, 464, 536, 577, 590

Index

Holloman, Frank, 408
Hollywood, 82, 193, 256, 258, 647. See
also Film and conspiracy theory
Hollywood (Vidal), 299
Hollywood Ten, 256, 318–321, 325
Holocaust, 597
Holocaust denial, 210, 321–324, 420, 433,
535, 619, 669
Holsinger, Joseph, 379
Homebrew, 294
Homestead Strike of 1892, 62
Hooper, Edward, 46
Hoover, J. Edgar, 7, 152, 248–249,
324–325, 645, 809, 825
anticommunism and, 68, 69, 70, 72,
159, 191
civil rights movement and, 127, 173
COINTELPRO and, 185–188
JFK assassination and, 394–395, 690
Johnson and, 394
King and, 324, 408
Kissinger and, 411
Mafia and, 452, 453
Roosevelt and, 9, 159
SDS and, 682
Watergate and, 152, 725
See also Federal Bureau of
Investigation
Hopkins, Budd, 488, 703
Hopkins, Harry, 627
Hopper, Hedda, 312
Horiuchi, Lon, 634
Horowitz, Leonard, 46
Horsey, Stephen, 203
Hospers, John, 431
Hostages, Iran, 349–351, 547–550, 552
Hottinguer, John Conrad, 745
Hougan, Jim, 729
House, Edward, 253
House Armed Services Committee, 702
House Banking and Currency Committee,
253
House Internal Security Committee, 327
House Judiciary Committee, 410–411,
561, 688, 728, 851
House Permanent Select Committee on
Intelligence, 379
House Select Committee on
Assassinations (HSCA), 158, 318,
392–394, 402–404, 406, 409, 566,
676, 724
House Un-American Activities Committee
(HUAC), 249, 256, 325–328, 420,
463
Chambers and, 159–160, 750
FBI and, 249, 324
Hiss and, 313–317
Hollywood Ten and, 318–321

little HUACs, 612
Nazism and, 137, 138
Nixon and, 541
Supreme Court and, 326, 327
witnesses, 70
See also McCarthy, Joseph
How Anyone Can Stop Paying Income
Taxes (Schiff), 342
How to Survive the IRS: My Battles
against Goliath (Minns), 343
“How We Can Coexist,” 649
Howard, Benjamin C., 688
Howe, Carol, 231, 556
Howe, Linda Moulton, 125, 154
Howe, Samuel Gridley, 136, 137
Howe, William, 200
Howell, Ricky, 317
Hoyt, William K., 496
Hubbard, Elizabeth, 640
Hubbard, L. Ron, 223, 344, 646–647
Hubbell, Webster L., 738
Hudson Institute, 618
Huggins, Jon, 187
Hughes, Howard, 328–329, 541, 558, 729
Hughes, John, 530
Hughes Aircraft, 328
Hull, Cordell, 8
Hull, John, 350–351
Human genome project, 308
Humanist Manifesto, 647
Hume, David, 296
Humphrey, Andrew, 203
Humphrey, Hubert, 410
Humphries, David, 225
“The Hun within Our Gates” (Roosevelt),
803
Hunt, Dorothy, 729
Hunt, E. Howard, 238, 434, 435, 542, 583,
655, 725, 726, 729
Hunt, Linda, 560
Hunt, Nelson Bunker, 350
Hunter (Macdonald/Pierce), 587
Hunter, Robert, 2, 761
Huntington, Collis, P., 214
Hurok, Sol, 371–372
Hussein, Saddam, 105–106, 107, 552, 655
Huston Plan, 725
Hutchins, Thomas, 687
Hutchinson, Anne, 330–331, 599
Hutchinson, Thomas, 60, 61, 131, 132,
133, 184
Hutchinson Family Singers, 32
Hutchison Wampoa, 575
Huxley, Aldous, 483
Hyde, Charles, 284
Hynek, J. Allen, 700, 701–702
Hyper-X program, 101
Hypnosis, 399, 401, 448, 481, 483

I. G. Farben, 307
I Heard It through the Grapevine
(Turner), 351
I Led Three Lives, 256
I Married a Communist, 70, 191, 256
I Was a Communist for the FBI, 70, 256
Ichord, Richard I., 327
Identification cards, 333–335
Ignatius of Loyola, Saint, 369
Illuminati, ix, 3, 10, 27, 256, 335–339
Antisemitism and, 80, 82–84
apocalypticism and, 87–88
arrival in United States, 337–339
Catholic Church and, 325, 336, 337
conspiratorial interpretations of history,
336–337
dollar bill and, 227
Federalists and, 337, 338, 339
Freemasonry and, 80, 335–337, 622
French Revolution and, 3, 52, 76,
115–116, 336–337, 622, 746
The Illuminatus! Trilogy, 339–341
John Birch Society and, 374
Microsoft and, 466
mind control and, 487, 492
Morse and, 511–512
one-world government and, 559
origins, 335–336
rap music and, 607
Robertson and, 621, 708
Robison and, 621–622
Silver Shirts and, 654
Skull and Bones Society and, 656, 657
Smith’s view, 666
subliminal messages, 683
suppression, 336
The Illuminatus! Trilogy (Shea and
Wilson), 339–341
Illustrations of Masonry (Morgan),
507–508
Immigrants, 6
anarchists, 62
anti-Catholicism, 65–67
Asian Americans, 95–97
Chinese, 96, 179, 236, 532
eugenics and, 244
Irish, 4, 52, 66, 370, 492–495, 531
Japanese, 364, 532
Jewish, 81
journalists, 51–52
Know-Nothings and, 412–413
legislation, 53, 62, 364, 532
nativism and, 529–533
1790s, 51–52
white slave trade fears, 735
Immigration Act (1918), 62
Immigration Act (1924), 364
Immigration Law (1917), 532

903

Index

The Imminent Dangers to the Free
Institutions of the United States
(Morse), 530
Immunizations, 309
Imperium (Yockey), 432
Implants, 309, 469, 481, 483, 487–488
In Bad Company: America’s Terrorist
Underground (Hamm), 556
Ince, Thomas, 311, 312
Income tax, 341–344, 469
Indianapolis Baptist Church, 470
Industrial espionage, 243
Industrial production, mind control and,
483, 484–485
Industrial Revolution, 685, 706
“Industrial Society and Its Future”
(Kaczynski), 705–706
Industrial Workers of the World (IWW),
6–7, 62, 68, 204, 344–347, 356, 611
Green Corn Rebellion and, 289
red summer of 1919 and, 614, 616
Industrialization, 357
Inglesby, Robert, 425
Inherit the Wind (Miller), 142
An Inquiry into the Assassination of
Abraham Lincoln (McLoughlin), 439
Insecure paranoia, 652
Inside/outside, 480–481
Inside the Company: CIA Diary (Agee),
212
Insiders, 149, 150, 178, 210–211, 233, 374,
469, 625–626
“The Inslaw Affair” (House Judiciary
Committee), 851
Institute for Christian Economics, 232
Institute for Historical Review (IHR), 323,
433, 618, 669
Institute for Legislative Action (ILA), 519,
520
Institute for Medical Research, 623
“Instruction to Catholics,” 59
Intelligence, xi. See also National Security
Agency
Intelligence Identities Protection Act, 212
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 127, 275,
341–344, 534
militias and, 469–470
Posse Comitatus and, 591–592
Internal Security Act of 1950, 326, 613
International Court of Justice (ICJ), 707
International Intelligence Briefing, 445
International Islamic Conference, 248
The International Jew (Ford), 83,
265–266, 559, 596
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 205,
559, 624, 691
International Police Academy, 378
Internationalists, 623–624

904

Internet, 10, 17, 347–349 371, 597, 647
abortion list, 35
Clinton and, 175
electronic money transfers, 288–289
encryption, 241, 242
FBI links, 249–250
hackers, 293–296
militias and, 468–472, 474
September 11 attacks and, 649–650
UFO/abduction sites, 705
viruses and worms, 294
Waco and, 718
Internment camps, 6, 9, 282, 344–346
The Interrupted Journey (Fuller), 703
Intolerable Acts, 60, 184
“An Introduction to the ‘Jewish
Protocols,’” 805
Intruders: The Incredible Visitations at
Copley Woods (Hopkins), 703
The Invaders, 257
Invaders from Mars, 191, 257
Invasion of the Body Snatchers, 191, 257
Invisibility experiments, 584
Invisible government, 541
Invisible Invaders, 257
Iran, 105, 156, 349, 551
hostages, 349–351, 547–550, 552,
572–573
October Surprise and, 547–550
Pan Am 103 and, 572–573
Iran, Shah of, 350
Iran-Contra, 107, 349–353, 441, 609
Iranian scandal, 351–352
October Surprise theory, 547–550
Iranian Revolution, 540
Iran-Iraq War, 551
Iraq, 105–106, 107, 708
oil industry and, 551–552
War on, 538, 539
See also Gulf War
Ireland, 494
Irish immigrants, 4, 52, 66, 370, 531
Molly Maguires, 492–495
Irish Northern Aid Committee
(NORAID), 354
Irish Republican Army (IRA), 353–354
Irish War of Independence, 353–354
Iron Curtain, 210
“Iron Curtain” speech (Churchill), 70, 190
The Iron Heel (London), 354–356
Irwin, Doug, 675
“Is Military Research Hazardous to
Veterans’ Health?” (Committee on
Veterans’ Affairs), 855
Islam, 248, 516–518
Islamic Resistance Movement (Hamas),
597
Isolationists, 137, 138, 139, 190, 666

Israel, 10, 572, 757
Book of Revelation and, 445
Holocaust denial and, 323
Iran-Contra and, 351
Jesuits and, 371
Johnson and, 376
oil industry and, 552
Protocols of the Elders of Zion and, 597
Israeli Mossad, 433, 573
Israeli-Arab War (1948), 399, 401
Isserman, Maurice, 69
It Came from Outer Space, 257
Italian American Civil Rights League, 372
Italy, 216, 231
J. B. Foster Ranch, 627
J. P. Morgan & Co., 505, 506
Jackson, Andrew, 122, 357–364, 688, 789
abolitionism and, 28, 31, 659
American Whigs and, 362–363
attempted assassination of, 361–362
Bank of the United States and, 111,
112–115, 287, 692
as Freemason, 76, 273
Native Americans and, 528
paranoia, 357
“Riot Year” and, 361–362
slaying the monster bank, 358–361
tariff bill, 545
use of veto, 358–359, 363
War of 1812 and, 302, 303
Jackson, George, 187–188
Jackson, Jesse, 37, 182, 721
Jacksonian Democrats, 278, 356, 545
Jacobin Clubs, 221
Jacobins, 50, 54, 115–116, 280, 336–337,
367, 746
Jacobite uprisings, 2, 65
Jacobs, David, 703
James, John S., 45
James Bond movies, 256
James I, 598
James II, 425, 600
Jameson, Frederic, 23, 224, 258, 260, 571,
596
Jamestown, Va., 104
Japan, 96–97, 237, 552, 626, 749. See also
Pearl Harbor
Japan Group, 691
Japanese Americans, 9, 364–366, 532
Jasper, William F., 861
Jay, John, 73, 134
Jay Treaty, 49, 50, 511
Jefferson, Thomas, 60, 116, 226, 280, 359,
366–369, 664, 746, 776
as agent of France and Revolution,
367–368
agrarian interests, 67, 300

Index

Alien and Sedition Acts and, 48–49, 51,
55
Bank of the United States and, 110–111
Burr and, 145, 146–147, 368
Declaration of Independence and, 2–3
Hamilton and, 296–297
Illuminati and, 338, 339, 367
Lewis and, 428, 430–431
nullification and, 545
on slavery, 29
The Jefferson Conspiracies (Chandler),
430–431
Jeffersonian Republicans, 668, 745–746
Jeffrey, Jason, 879
Jekyll Island meeting, 252, 253, 507
Jenkins, Jerry, 445, 477–478
Jenks, Robert, 178
Jeremiah Films, 89, 177–178
Jerusalem Prize, 219
Jessup, Morris, 584
Jesuits, 115, 335, 369–371
Jewish Defense League (JDL), 371–373
Jewish financiers, 85, 108–109, 252, 255,
654
Butler affair and, 625
neo-Nazi view of, 533–534
populist view of, 590
Protocols of the Elders of Zion and,
595–596
Jewish-Masonic world conspiracy, 124
Jews, ix, 7–8, 10
African Americans and, 11, 518
apocalypticism, 87–88
Bolsheviks and, 83, 323, 596–597
British royal family and, 135
corporations and, 206
Hollywood and, 319
immigrants, 81
Ku Klux Klan and, 418
militia views of, 94, 167, 433, 591
one-world government and, 595
Pound’s view, 593–594
Robertson’s view, 621
slave trade and, 518
World War I and, 321–322
See also Antisemitism; Jewish
financiers; Protocols of the Elders of
Zion; Zionist Occupied Government
Jews for the Preservation of Firearms
Ownership, 143, 468
JFK (Stone), 11, 118, 258, 383, 392, 565,
577, 627, 675–679
“JFK Assassination, 11/22/63: Coincidence
or Conspiracy?” 842
JFK—The Book of the Film (Stone and
Sklar), 678
Jibril, Ahmed, 572, 573
Jim Crow system, 171

Jim’s Grill, 402, 406
Joel Gray farm, 472
John Birch Society (JBS), 10, 116, 233,
373–374, 382, 586
New World Order and, 210, 211, 469,
474, 536, 621
Panama Canal and, 575
Roosevelt and, 625
United Nations and, 707
John Paul II, 120, 150
John Wilkes Booth (Buntline), 436
John Wilkes Booth, the Assassinator of
Abraham Lincoln (Haco), 436
Johnson, Andrew, 203, 214
Lincoln assassination and, 435, 437, 440
Johnson, J. Neely, 641
Johnson, James Weldon, 614
Johnson, Jerome A., 372
Johnson, Lyndon Baines, 193, 328,
374–377, 522, 582
assassinations and, 375–376
Gulf of Tonkin incidents and, 689–690
JFK assassination and, 383, 393–394,
723, 724
Johnson, R. W., 382
Johnson-Reed Act (1924), 67, 532
Joint Chiefs of Staff, 117, 151–152, 412,
560, 628
Joint Congressional Committee, 353
Joint Intelligence Objectives Agency
(JIOA), 560
Joint Legislative Committee Investigating
Seditious Activities, 611
Joint Legislative Fact-Finding Committee
on Un-American Activities, 612
Joliet, Louis, 687
Joly, Maurice, 321, 593
Jones, Anson, 464
Jones, Candy, 487
Jones, Jim, 90, 377–379, 487
Jones, Paul Roland, 632
Jones, Paula, 177, 646, 738
Jones, Solomon, 406
Jones, Stephen, 555–556
Jones, Steven, 231
Jones, William, 112
Jones Family, 290
Jonestown, 377–379
Jordan, Ambrose, 79
Jordan, David Starr, 243
Josephson, Emanuel, 210, 623–624, 813
Josephson, Matthew, 204
Jowers, Lloyd, 402, 406, 409
JP-8 jet fuel, 198
Judas Priest trial, 682, 683
Judd, S. Corning, 202
Judge, John, 377
Judicial Watch, 645

Judiciary Committee, 78
“The Jukes: A Study in Crime, Pauperism,
Disease, and Heredity” (Dugdale),
244
The Jungle (Sinclair), 693
Junk bonds, 644, 723
Junky (Burroughs), 147
Justice Act, 184
Justice Department, 7, 9, 35, 69, 154, 182,
228, 238, 551
BCCI and, 107–108
Black Panthers and, 127
brown scare and, 138, 139
King assassination and, 404
Mafia and, 451, 452
Microsoft and, 466, 467
Kaczynski, David, 705–706
Kaczynski, Theodore John (Ted), 230, 458,
705–707
Kahane, Meir, 371, 372–373
Kahl, Gordon, 592
KAL (Korean Air Lines) flight 007,
381–383, 544
Kallikak family, 244–245
The Kallikak Family (Goddard), 245
Kama Sutra, 241
Kamchatka Peninsula, 381
Kamehameha V, 302, 303
Kamenev, Lev, 323
Kansas, 136, 661–662
Kansas-Nebraska Act, 5, 413, 661
Kantor, Seth, 631
Kappel, Kenneth, 164
Karlsen, Carol F., 740
Kashoggi, Adnan, 107
Al-Kassar, Monzer, 573
Kassenbaum, Nancy, 414
Katzmann, Frederick G., 637
Kay, Kathy, 631
Kaysing, Bill, 501
Kazan, Elia, 326, 493
Keating, Charles, 643, 644
Keating, Kathleen, 120
Keenan, Jason, 94
Keenan, Victoria, 94
Kefauver, Estes, 451
Kefauver Crime Committee, 451, 452
Kehoe, Andres P., 64
Keith, James, 481
Keith, Jim, 125, 483, 487, 491, 577
Kellogg, John Harvey, 243
Kelly, Dan, 485
Kendall, Amos, 31
Kennan, George, 211
Kennedy, Edward M., 162–165, 491,
609
Kennedy, Jacqueline, 383, 386, 558, 630

905

Index

Kennedy, John F., 72
Bay of Pigs and, 117–118, 152–153,
394
as Catholic, 63, 370, 371, 438
cold war and, 190, 193
Cuban missile crisis and, 117, 153,
216–217, 395
Marilyn Monroe and, 499
presidential campaign, 63, 161
See also Bay of Pigs invasion
Kennedy, John F., assassination, 9, 11, 22,
163, 231, 274, 383–397, 454, 457,
669
anti-Kennedy ad, 630–631
autopsy, 386–388
Bay of Pigs and, 117–119, 394, 677
Brussell and, 140–414
CIA and, 157
congressional investigation, 392–393
Cuba and, 153, 395–396
Dealey Plaza, 383, 384–385
establishment view, 383–384
eyewitness testimony, 385–386
Garrison affair, 392
Grassy Knoll, 383, 384
Johnson and, 375–376, 383, 393–394
Mafia and, 391–392, 393, 394–395
military-industrial complex and, 395
Nixon and, 541–542
Onassis and, 558
public opinion, 561–562
single bullet theory, 385, 724
Smoking Gun tape and, 542, 728–729
Steamshovel Press view, 672
Texas School Book Depository (TSBD),
383
three tramps, 384–385, 690, 729
Tippit incident, 383, 388, 391, 567, 568,
632
Torbitt Document, 690–691
umbrella man, 384, 385, 691
Warren Commission report, 396,
723–725
Watergate reference to, 729
wounds, testimony, 386–388
Zapruder film, 219, 384, 385, 392, 610,
691, 724
See also JFK (Stone); Oswald, Lee
Harvey; Ruby, Jack
Kennedy, Joseph P., 558, 722
Kennedy, Robert F., 9, 22, 153, 161, 172,
452, 566
assassination of JFK and, 386, 388
Bay of Pigs and, 729
Cuban missile crisis and, 216–217
Mafia and, 394
Marilyn Monroe and, 498, 499
NSA and, 521–522

906

Kennedy, Robert F., assassination, 163,
218, 397–402
conspiracy theories, 401–402
inconsistencies in evidence, 399–401
Johnson and, 375, 376
lady in polka dot dress, 400–401, 402
trial, 399
Kennedy, Ted, 543, 558
Kennedy-Lawford, Patricia, 499
Kent, Duke of, 246, 297
Kent State University, 229
Kentucky Fried Chicken, 38
Kentucky Gazette, 221
Kenworthy, Joseph M., 449
Kerouac, Jack, 147
Key, Charles, 555
Key, Francis Scott, 28
Key, Wilson Bryan, 485, 682
The Key of Liberty (Manning), 617, 780
The Key to the Scriptures (Eddy), 168
Keyhoe, Donald, 700, 701
Keynesian welfare state, 205
KGB, 157, 316, 395, 625
Oswald and, 390, 565, 566
Khan, Genghis, 95
Khmer Rouge, 150
Khomeini, Ayatollah, 350, 552
Khrushchev, Nikita, 153, 192, 216, 395
Khumhotop II, 241
Kimball, Warren, 627
Kimble, Jules Ricco, 407
Kimche, David, 351
Kimmel, Husband, 8
King, James, 641
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 9, 22, 39, 172,
419, 534
COINTELPRO and, 186–187
J. Edgar Hoover and, 324, 408
King, Martin Luther, Jr., assassination, 36,
401, 402–410
evidence of government involvement,
407–410
eyewitnesses, 405–406
Johnson and, 375, 376
Mafia and, 409
official story, 402–403
problems with official story, 403–407
King, Rodney, 36, 39
King, Stephen, 215–216
King Philip’s War, 523, 524–525, 526, 600
Kirk, Arthur, 592
Kissinger, Henry, 246, 410–412, 423, 552,
609, 650
Bilderbergers and, 123
BNL and, 106
Bush and, 149
Cambodian bombing and, 152
CFR and, 210

Pentagon Papers and, 411–412,
582–583
Kitchen debate, 192
Kitman, Marvin, 618
Kitty, Robert, 317
Klanwatch, 473
Klass, Philip, 489–490, 629
Klaus, Samuel, 560
Klebold, Dylan, 458, 486
Kleindienst, Richard, 434, 726
KLRB, 140
Klute (Pakula), 571
Knigge, Adolf Franz Friederich, 336
Knight, Peter, 47, 260
Knights of Columbus, 67, 417
Knights of the Golden Circle, 201, 202,
435, 436
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, 535
Knights of the White Camellia, 139, 174
Knights Templar, 271
Knowledge, end of, 481, 483
Knowles, Charles, 622
Know-Nothing (American) Party, 66, 81,
412–414, 529, 531, 641
Knox, Henry, 540, 667
Knox, Neal, 519
Koch, Charles G., 414–415, 431–432
Koch, David, 414, 415, 431–432
Koch, Fred Chase, 414
Koch, Frederick, 414
Koch, William I., 414–415
Koch Industries Inc. (KII), 414–415
Koehl, Matthias, 534
Koestler, Arthur, 159
Kones, Iris, 371–372
Kool cigarettes, 38
Koop, C. Everett, 647
Kopechne, Mary Jo, 162–165
Korea, 191, 504–505, 749
Korean War, 457, 486, 490
Koresh, David, 89–90, 143, 175, 230,
717–718
Kraemer, Heinrich, 642
Krassner, Paul, 141, 166, 672, 752
Krenwinkel, Patricia, 460
Kristallnacht, 209
Krogh, Egil, 238
Krupey, G. J., 44
Kubrick, Stanley, 500
Kuhn, Fritz Julius, 138
Kuhn, Loeb, and Company, 252
Ku Klux Klan (KKK), 5–6, 7–8, 10, 38,
119, 174, 207, 256, 415–422, 556,
669
American Nazi Party and, 420
anti-Catholicism, 64, 67, 417–419
antisemitism, 322, 418, 419–420, 421
Christian Identity and, 167

Index

COINTELPRO and, 187
HUAC’s view, 327
neo-Nazis and, 94
1960s, 420
paramilitary training, 421
Reconstruction Era ideology, 416–417
RFK assassination and, 401
terrorism, 229, 556
after World War II, 419–421
Kunze, Wilhelm, 138
Kurshan, Nancy, 752
Kutler, Stanley, 728
Kuwait, 107, 552
Kvasnikov, Leonid, 97–98, 99

La Cosa Nostra (LCN). See Mafia
La Vey, Anton Szandor, 642
LaBianca murders, 459–460
Laden, Osama bin, 370, 556, 649
LaFollette, Phil, 462
LaFollette, Robert, 461–462
LaHaye, Tim, 445, 477–478
Lait, Jack, 452
Lamont, Corliss, 193
Lance, T. Bertram “Bert,” 106, 107
Landau, Henry, 281
Landmark Legal Foundation, 344, 645
Landon, Alf, 333
Landrum-Griffin Act, 452
Land values, 114, 359
Lane, David, 121
Lane, Mark, 394, 632, 729
Lane, Ralph, 524
Lang, Fritz, 484
Langan, Pete, 556, 557
Lange, James, 164
Language, paranoia and, 147, 148
Lanphier, Charles, 201
LaPierre, Wayne, 519, 520
Lara Croft: Tomb Raider, 256
Lardner, George, Jr., 677
Lardner, Ring, Jr., 318, 320
LaRouche, Lyndon, 135, 149, 245,
423–424, 547
The Last Days of John Lennon: A Personal
Memoir (Seaman), 427
The Last Days of Marilyn Monroe (Wolfe),
499
The Late Great Planet Earth (Lindsey),
88, 445, 477, 633
Latin American slave revolts, 664,
665
Laud, William, 598
Lauritsen, Jon, 44
Lavender Menace, 578
Law Enforcement Intelligence Unit
(LEIU), 406
Lawford, Peter, 499

Lawrence, Richard, 361–362
Lawson, John Howard, 318–319
Lawton et al. v. Republic of Iraq, 886
Layton, Larry, 377
Lazar, Robert, 91, 704
Leaderless resistance, 473, 535, 592
“Leaderless Resistance” (Beam), 119, 473
League for Industrial Democracy (LID),
680
League of Gileadites, 136
League of Nations, 1, 83, 142, 211, 625,
707, 708
League of the Silver Shirts. See Silver
Shirts
Leaphart, Vincent. See Africa, John
Lear, John, 703–704
Lear, Norman, 121
Lear, William P., 703
Leary, Timothy, 166, 229, 371, 435, 491,
672, 731
Leche, Richard, 446
Lecompton Constitution, 661–662
Lectures on Our Israelitish Origin
(Wilson), 167
Ledeen, Michael, 351
Lee, Henry, 734
Lee, Richard Henry, 73, 671, 765
Lee, Robert E., 136, 436, 440–441
Lee, Vincent, 567
L’effroyable mensonge (Meyssan), 649
Left, 9, 19, 21, 159, 637
anticommunism and, 68–70
brown scare and, 137
FBI and, 249–250
identification cards and, 333
Kaczynski’s view, 706
KAL conspiracy theories and, 382–383
New Left, 72, 187–188, 193, 327, 534,
752–753
Old Left, 72, 193, 327, 680
Oswald and, 564, 566–567
Rosenbergs and, 99
Scaife and, 645
view of Roosevelt, 626
Left Behind series (Jenkins and LaHaye),
445, 477–478
Legion of Doom, 294, 295
Legionnaire’s Disease, 308, 309
Legitimatists (Nicaragua), 720–721
Leishmaniasis, 290
Leisler, Jacob, 425
Leisler’s rebellion, 424–426
Lemke, William, 209
Lendeveg, George W., 303
Lenin, V. I., 68, 612
Lennon, John, 188, 426–428
Lennon, Sean, 426
LeRoy checks, 275, 276

Lesseps, Ferdinand de, 574
“Letter to Arthur Lee” (Adams), 768
“Letter to the Lords of the Trade”
(Hunter), 761
Levy, Steven, 293, 295
Lewin, Leonard C., 618–619
Lewinsky, Monica, 738
Lewis, Meriwether, 428–431
Lewis, Wyndham, 593
Liberal Democrats (Nicaragua), 720
Liberalization, 206
The Liberator, 29, 30
Libertarian Party, 120, 431–432
Liberto, Frank, 409
Liberty, as code word for guns, 334
“Liberty Boys,” 617
Liberty Lobby, 250, 323, 432–433, 618
Libra (DeLillo), 118, 220, 568
Libya, 574, 649
Liddy, G. Gordon, 238, 433–435, 725, 726,
729
Liens, 275–276
Lifton, David, 387
Light on Masonry (Bernard), 784
Lilly, Eli, 308
Lincoln, Abraham, 32, 137, 201, 287, 414,
464, 792
Emancipation Proclamation, 278
on trusts, 692–693
Lincoln, Abraham, assassination, 5, 28,
435–441
basis in events, 435–436
commemoration and revisionism,
438–439
culture and politics, 436–438
post–World War II theories, 439–440
The Lincoln Conspiracy, (Balsiger and
Sellier), 439–440
Lincoln Memorial, 438
Lincoln Savings and Loan, 644
Lind, Michael, 621
Lindberg, Charles, 139
Lindbergh, Anne Morrow, 442
Lindbergh, Charles, Jr., 441–445
Lindbergh baby kidnapping, 441–445
eyewitnesses, 444
Lindsey, Hal, 11, 88, 445–446, 477,
633
Lindstedt, Martin, 468
Lingeman, Richard, 618
Lingg, Louis, 304, 305
Lipkin, Efrem, 294
Lippmann, Walter, 366
Lipset, Seymour Martin, 86
Lipstadt, Deborah, 322
Little, Frank, 346
The Little Flower, 207
Littman, Jonathan, 295

907

Index

Liz Claiborne, 38, 39
Local government authority, 591
“Lodge Reservations,” 142
Logan, John, 525
Logan Act, 124
Lon Nol, 156
London, Jack, 354–356
London shoe-bomber, 698
Long, Huey Pierce, 209, 446–447, 666
Long Telegram, 190, 191
Look, Christopher, 163
Lord Dunmore’s War, 525
Lorenz cipher, 242
Lorenzen, Coral, 701
Lorenzen, Jim, 701
Lorraine Motel, 404, 406
Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD),
39, 397, 399–401, 620
Los Angeles riots of 1992, 251
Los Angeles Sheriff’s Office (LASO), 460
Lost-Found Nation of Islam, 517
L’Ouverture, Toussaint, 665
Louisiana Purchase, 428, 659–660
Louisiana Territory, 145–146, 428
Louis Napoleon III, 321
Louis XIV, 242
Louis XVI, 367
Lovejoy, Elijah P., 31
Lovell, James, 501
Lovell, Stanley, 448
Loyalty program, 612–613
LSD, 447–449, 459
mind control and, 447–449, 486, 491,
492
Lucas, Robert, 686–688
Luce, Henry, 656
Luciano, Charles “Lucky,” 452
Ludlow Massacre, 356
Lumumba, Patrice, 157
Lundeen, Ernest, 138
Lusitania, 142, 231, 282, 449–450
Lusk Committee, 611
“Lynch Men,” 31
Lynching, 35, 346, 417, 419, 614, 616
Lyon, Matthew, 54
Macarthur, Donald M., 826
MacArthur, Douglas, 579
MacBride, Roger, 431
Macdonald, Andrew. See Pierce,
William L.
MacDonald, Larry, 382
Mack, John, 703, 744
Mackey-Kallis, Susan, 677
Maclean, Donald, 98–99
Madhubuti, Haki R., 45
Madison, James, 28, 49, 73, 111, 224, 300,
545

908

Hamilton and, 296–297
Mafia (La Cosa Nostra), 186, 451–453
Hoffa and, 317–318
Jewish Defense League and, 372
JFK assassination and, 384, 391–392,
394
King assassination and, 409
Onassis and, 557–558
Oswald and, 564, 566–567
Ruby and, 391–392, 632
Magisono, Gus, 633
Magruder, Jeb, 434
Mahon, Dennis, 556, 557
Mahoney, Dennis, 201
Mailer, Norman, 166, 193, 194, 453–454,
679, 860
Oswald research, 565, 566–567, 568
The Majestic, 256
Majestic 12. See MJ-12
Malcolm X, 37, 173, 247, 515, 518
Malcolm X, assassination of, 9, 171, 247,
454–457, 518
FBI and, 456–457
Harlem Drug Lords theory, 454–455
NYPD theory, 455–456
Maldon Institute, 645
Maleficium, 739
Malleus Maleficarum (Kraemer and
Sprenger), 642
Maltz, Albert, 319
Malzac, Dennis, 556
Mamet, David, 317
“Man shortage” of the 1980s, 9
Manchuria, 749
The Manchurian Candidate (Condon), 191
The Manchurian Candidate (film), 256,
258, 457–459, 554, 610
Manchurian Candidate theories, 485–486,
554
“Mandamus Judicial Notice” (Montana
Freemen), 859
Mandel, Benjamin, 70
Mangourit, Michael Ange, 280
MANHATTAN Project, 98, 583
Manifest destiny, 18, 464, 660, 719, 721
Mann Act, 249, 735, 736
Manning, William, 617, 780
Mansfield, Harold, 587
Mansfield, Margaret, 92
Manson, Charles, 154, 610
Mantell, Thomas, 700
Mao II (DeLillo), 219
Mao Tse-tung, 191, 681
Maoist Progressive Labor bloc, 731
Marcel, Jesse A., 628
Marcello, Carlos, 318, 394
Marcia, Madame, 299
Marcy, William, 77

Margin loans, 722
Margolis, Jon, 677
Marijuana, 238–239
Marilyn Manson, 683
Market liberals, 205
Market Revolution, 357
Markey, Edward J., 838
Markham, Hugh, 163
Marks, John, 458, 486, 491
Marmaduke, Vincent, 203
Marooned, 500
Marrs, Jim, 396, 488, 565, 566, 676
Marrs, Texe, 482, 485
Mars, 120
Marsden, George, 648
Marshall, E. Pierce, 415
Marshall, George, 191, 462, 579–580
Marshall, J. Howard, II, 415
Marshall, J. Howard, III, 415
Marshall, John, 147, 745, 746
Marshall Plan, 191
Martha’s Vineyard, 162
Martial law, 250, 256, 470–471
Martin, John, 138
Martinez, Eugenio, 726
Marx, Karl, 374
Marxism, 72, 159, 319, 485, 612, 621
Mary, Queen, 65
Maryland, 65
Mason, Charles, 459–460
Mason, George, 60, 73, 74, 468, 773
Mason, Stevens T., 687–688
Mason & Dixon (Pynchon), 603
Massachusetts Bay Colony
anti-Catholicism, 65
Boston Tea Party, 132–134
Hutchinson and, 330–331
Jesuits and, 369–370
Massachusetts Constitution (1780), 653
Massachusetts Government Act, 184
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), 293, 347
Massachusetts Regulator Movement, 653
Massassoit, 525
Massing, Hede, 159, 160
“Master” conspiracy, 9, 10
Masters of Deception, 295
Mather, Cotton, 2, 80, 476, 639, 740–741,
760
Mather, Increase, 80, 600, 601, 741
Mathews, Robert, 121, 470
Mathiessen, F. O., 656
Matrisciana, Pat, 176, 177
The Matrix, 261–262
Matsch, Richard G., 556
Matthews, J.B., 70
Maumee Bay, 687
May, Alan Nunn, 98

Index

Mbeki, Thabo, 46
McAndrew, James, 629
McCain, John, 458, 644
McCarran, Patrick, 70, 71, 159
McCarthy, John, 293
McCarthy, Joseph R., 68, 70–71, 72, 159,
161, 191, 249, 324, 326, 460–464,
612, 613, 741, 812
United Nations and, 707
view of Roosevelt, 625
Yalta conference and, 749, 750
McCarthyism, ix, 159, 249, 637, 666
VENONA Project and, 713–714
McCarty, Burke, 438
McClellan, John, 451–452
McCollough, Marrell, 408
McCook, Edward Moody, 302
McCord, James, 434, 725, 726, 729
McCormick Harvester Company, 304
McCoy, Alfred W., 237
McCulloch v. Maryland, 122
McDonald, Juanita, 182–183
McDougal, James, 737–738
McDougal, Susan, 737, 738
McDougall, Alexander, 539–540
McFadden, Louis T., 808
McFarlane, Robert, 350, 351, 353
McGillycuddy, Valentine, 284
McGovern, George, 753
McGraw, James, 405
McKinley, William, 58, 141, 288, 506, 710
assassination, 62–63, 311–312, 564
McLamb, Gerald “Jack,” 251
McLaughlin, James, 284
McLaughlin, Robert, 700
McLean, Adrienne, 745
McLoughlin, Emmett, 439
McMartin Preschool case, 642
McMillan, Priscilla, 565
McNamara, Robert, 582
McParlan, James, 345, 492, 493, 495
McQuiston, George, 447
McVeigh, Timothy James, 228, 553–557
militias and, 144, 230–231, 467, 473,
474
mind control and, 335, 488, 554
Turner Diaries and, 535, 585
Waco and, 634, 718
Means, Gaston, 299
Medary, Samuel, 201
Medeiros, Celestino, 638
Medeiros Confession, 637
Media, 46, 142, 220
evangelical, 620
Rockefellers and, 624
Sedition Act and, 53–55
subliminal advertising, 682–683
Al-Megrahi, Abdel Basset, 572, 574

Mein Kampf (Hitler), 138, 244, 267, 597
Meir, Golda, 372
Melley, Timothy, 23, 260
Mellon, Andrew, 239, 342–343
Mellon Institute, 265
Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire du
Jacobinisme (Barruel), 115–117, 337
Memoirs (Nixon), 730
Memoirs of My Nervous Illness
(Schreber), 576
Memphis Police Department (MPD), 403,
405, 408, 409
Men in Black, 257
Mencken, H. L., 142
Meneses, Juan Norwin, 180, 183
Mental illness, 86, 480, 576
Menzel, Donald, 701
Mercenaries, 719–720
Mercury program, 501
Merrill, Charles E., 674, 722
Merrill Lynch, 674
Mesmer, Friedrich Anton, 483
Mesmerism, 483–484
Message to the Blackman in America
(Muhammad), 823
Metaksa, Tanya, 520
“Metamora” (play), 526
Metaphysical College, 169
Metaphysics, 481–482
Metropolis (Lang), 484
Mexican Cession, 660
Mexican-American War, 4, 464–466, 660,
665, 719–721, 756
Mexico, Zimmerman telegram and,
756–757
Meyssan, Thierry, 649
Mfume, Kweisi, 182
Michael, Lou, 553
Michaux, André, 280
Michelle Remembers (Smith and Pazder),
642
Michigan, 686–688
Michigan Militia, 520, 688, 708, 718
Microsoft, 466–467, 693, 748
Microwave transmissions, 488
Midnight Cry, 478
Miles, Nelson A., 284
Military Reconstruction Act, 438
Military tribunals, 203
Military-industrial complex, 157, 194, 205,
395
Militia movement, 143, 196–197, 535
Militia of Montana, 251, 334, 470, 473,
555, 708, 718
Militias, 10, 90, 467–476
beliefs, 467–470
Constitution and, 144, 467, 468, 470
Estes Park, CO meeting, 473

FBI definition, 468
hidden agendas, 472–475
McVeigh and, 144, 230–231, 467, 473,
474
Mormons, 509, 510
neomilitia movement, 470
Oklahoma City bombing and, 554–555
one-world government and, 559
racism and antisemitism, 472–473
religiosity and, 473–474
rise and fall of, 470–472
Silver Shirts, 653–655
terrorism and, 230–231
United Nations and, 707–708
websites, 468–470, 474
ZOG and, 758
See also Regulator movements
Milk, Harvey, 378
Milken, Michael, 507, 644, 723
Millenarianism, 11, 84, 476–478, 559, 654,
758
Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, 86,
87, 474
premillenarianism and conspiracy
theory, 477–478
Second Coming of Christ, 86–87,
232–233, 445, 476–477, 478–480,
621, 648
slaves and, 694
See also Apocalypticism
Miller, Arthur, 70, 142, 741
Miller, David C., 507
Miller, Samuel, 51
Miller, William, 476, 478–480, 651
Milligan, Lambdin P., 203
Million Man March, 247, 248, 518
Mills, Al, 379
Mills, C. Wright, 681
Mills, Jeannie, 379
Mind control, 158, 199, 222, 480–489
anxieties and concerns of, 481–483
assassins and, 394, 483, 486, 488, 568,
609, 610, 672
brainwashing, 457–458, 481, 485
CIA and, 485–487
cult experiments, 377
death of reality, 481–482
death of the human, 481, 482–483, 487
death of the self, 481
end of knowledge, 481, 483
hypnosis, 399, 401, 448, 481, 483
implants, 309, 469, 481, 483, 487–488
industrial production and, 483, 484–485
Korean War, 457, 486
LSD and, 447–449, 486, 491, 492
mass media and subliminal advertising,
484, 485
McVeigh and, 335, 488, 554

909

Index

Mind control cont.
mental illness and, 427
of mentally ill people, 427
Moonies and, 504
origins of conspiracies, 483–485
Oswald and, 394, 458, 486, 568, 610,
672
psychological humiliations, 423
Salinger and, 427–428
social engineering, 484, 486
soulless body, 481, 482, 483
technophobia, 481, 483, 487–488
UFO conspiracies, 482, 487–488
See also MK-ULTRA
Mind Control, Oswald and JFK: Were We
Controlled? (Thomas), 672
Mingo Creek Society, 733–734
“Minister Farrakhan: In His Own Words”
(ADL), 884
Minns, Michael, 343
“Minute of Conversation with Genet”
(Jefferson), 776
Minutemen, 707
Mirabeau, 622
Miscegenation, 96, 97, 243
Miscone, Dan, 378
Missing Time (Hopkins), 703
Missouri Compromise, 5, 464, 659–660,
661
Missouri Militia, 468
Missouri State Penitentiary, 405
Mitchell, Charles, 673, 722
Mitchell, John, 434, 687
Mitnick, Kevin, 295
Mitrione, Dan, 378
MJ-12 (Majestic 12, MAJIC-12), 91,
489–490, 629, 703, 704
MK-NAOMI, 491
MK-SEARCH, 157
MK-ULTRA, 149, 157–158, 379, 448, 458,
484, 485–486, 490–492, 610
Mob violence, red summer of 1919,
614–617
Mobocracy, 3
MOGUL, 628, 629
Mohrenschildt, George de, 566–567
Moldea, Dan, 318
Molly Maguires, 492–495
Monarchists, 296–297
Monck, General, 93
Mondale, Walter, 440
A Monetary History of United States
(Friedman and Schwartz), 674
Money laundering, 105, 106
Money trust, 288
Monica Lewinsky scandal, 175
Monk, Maria, 66, 495–498, 530
Monroe, James, 225

910

Monroe, Marilyn, 9, 454, 498–500
Montana Freemen, 275–276, 758, 859
Montesquieu, Baron de, 73, 116, 337
Montgomery bus boycott, 171
Moody, Charles, 284
Moon, Sun Myung, 445, 503
Moon landing, 9, 500–503
anomalies, 502
case against hoax, 502–503
case for hoax theory, 501–502
community of believers, 501
opinion polls, 562–563
origins and context, 500–501
Moon of Popping Trees (Smith), 284
Mooney, Edward, 210
Moonies, 503–505
Moore, Charles B., 628, 630
Moore, Fred, 294
Moore, Michael, 539
Moore, William, 489, 490, 584
Moore, William L., 628–629, 703
Moorer, Thomas, 412
Mootoo, C. Leslie, 377–378
Mora, Juan Rafael, 721
Moral Majority, 178, 544, 620
Moral panic, 20–21, 294
Moral philosophy, 73
Moravians, 527
More Wonders of the Invisible World
(Calef), 741
Morelli Gang, 638
Morgan, J. P., Jr., 507
Morgan, John Pierpont, 252, 253, 288,
505–507, 575, 623, 637, 673
Morgan, Junius, 505
Morgan, Thomas J., 284
Morgan, William, 3, 76, 77, 273, 507–508
Morgenstern, George, 626
Mormon War, 510
Mormonism, 3–4, 229, 508–511
Mormons, ix, 3–4, 229
Morrill Tariff, 201
Morris, Buckner, 203
Morris, Gouverneur, 540
Morris, Lewis, 755
Morris, Robert, 110, 294, 540
Morse, Jedidiah, 3, 4, 76, 116, 272, 338,
512–513, 622, 781
Morse, Samuel F. B., 4, 413, 513, 530, 791
Mortgages, 643
Mortimer, Lee, 452
Morton, Levi P., 506
Morton, Oliver, 202, 203
Mosaddeq, Mohammed, 156
Mosby’s Rangers, 436, 441
Mossad, 433, 573
Most, Johann, 62
Mother Plane, 516

Motion Picture Alliance for the
Preservation of American Ideals
(MPA), 319
Moultrie, William, 280
Mountain Church, 535
Mount Rushmore, 438–439
MOVE, 128, 513–514
Movement for the Restoration of the Ten
Commandments of God, 90
Moynihan, Daniel, 195, 714
Muckrakers, 693
Muhammad, Elijah, 37, 173, 223, 247,
248, 457, 515–516, 517–518, 823
Muhammad, Wali Farad (Wallace Fard),
516
Muhammad, Warith Deen, 247, 248, 518
Mullins, Eustace, 108, 474, 554
Multiculturalism, 119
Multilateralism, 624
Mundt, Karl, 326
Mundt-Nixon Bill, 541
Munroe, Timothy, 508
Munson, H. H. Rube, 289
Murnion, Nickolas, 275
Murray, Eunice, 499
Murrell, John, 174
Music, 148, 577–578
rap, 607–609, 651–652
Muskie, Edmund, 352
Muslim American Community, 516
Mussolini, Benito, 593
Mutual UFO Network (MUFON), 704
My Education: A Book of Dreams
(Burroughs), 148
My War with the CIA (Sihanouk), 158
Nagy, Ferenc, 691
Al-Nahayan, Zayed bin Sultan, 107
The Naked and the Dead (Mailer), 453
Naked Lunch (Burroughs), 147–148
The Naked Lunch (film), 148, 216
NASA Mooned America (René), 501
Nasaw, David, 312
Nash, Thomas, 66
Nast, Thomas, 214
Nat Turner’s Rebellion, 665
Nation of Islam (NOI), 11–12, 37, 45, 173,
247–248, 515–518, 608
antisemitism and, 84, 597
Malcolm X assassination and, 454, 457
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), 100, 101,
120, 348, 500, 690–691
Apollo cabin fire (1967), 502
Apollo program, 501–503
Challenger disaster, 502, 503
National Aerospace Plane (NASP),
100–101

Index

National Alliance, 535, 585
National Archives and Records
Administration (NARA), 728
National Caucus of Labor Committees
(NCLC), 423, 424
National Christian Association, 274
National Enquirer, 427, 432
National Firearms Act of 1934, 519
National Gazette, 51, 220, 297
National German-American Alliance
(1901–1918), 281
National Greenback Party, 589
National Hotel, 435
National ID card, 333–334
National Institute of Health, 290, 307, 491
National Intelligencer, 363
National Investigations Committee on
Aerial Phenomena (NICAP), 701,
702, 704
National Mobilization to End the War in
Vietnam, 752
National Origins Acts, 529, 532
National parks, 708
National Reform Association (NRA),
77–78
National Response Plan, 718
National Review, 161, 373, 374, 432, 433
National Rifle Association (NRA), 143,
197, 473, 518–520
National Science Foundation (NSF), 347
National Security Act of 1947, 155
National Security Affairs, 152
National Security Agency (NSA), 242–243,
260, 316, 348, 466, 520–522, 613,
625
cold war and, 521
telecommunications surveillance,
521–522
UFOs and, 704
VENONA Project and, 713–714
Vietnam War and, 521
National Security Council (NSC), 191,
216–217, 349, 412
National Security Directive, 6, 520
National Socialist Liberation Front
(NSLF), 535
National Socialist White People’s Party
(NSWPP), 534–535, 586
National Socialist World, 586
National Socialists, 654. See also NeoNazis
National Spotlight, 432
National States Rights Party (NSRP), 420
National Transportation Safety Board, 655,
696–698
National Union for Social Justice, 209
National Union Party (NUP), 209
National Vanguard Books, 586, 587

National Youth Alliance, 586
Nationalism, 468, 474, 540
Native Americans, 1, 6, 30, 522–529, 600,
618
American Indian Movement, 55–58
Bacon’s Rebellion and, 104–105
Christian converts, 526–528
Ghost Dance religion, 282–285
myth of the superchief, 523–526
Paxton Boys massacre, 526–527
Pontiac, 587–589, 670
regulator movement and, 617, 618
warfare, 522–523
Nativism, 96, 138, 167, 529–533
anti-Catholicism, 4, 7, 66, 530–531
asylum tradition, 529–530
English only movement, 533
exclusion versus Americanization,
532–533
militias and, 470
See also Know-Nothing (American)
Party
Naturalization Act, 53, 96, 529–530
Nauvoo, 509
Nauvoo Expositor, 510
Naval Court of Inquiry, 711
Navasky, Victor, 618
Nazi spy rings, 138
Nazi war criminals, 560–561
Nazis, 69, 209, 231, 666
American Nazi Party, 420
brown scare, 137–140
eugenics and, 244
mind control and, 484
Protocols of the Elders of Zion and, 597
See also Neo-Nazis
Nazi-Soviet pact, 69, 159, 325
Nebraska v. Meyer, 282
Neebe, Oscar, 304, 305
Neelly, James, 429
Negri, Antonia, 124
Nellis Air Force Base, 103
Nelson, Stewart, 293
Neo-Nazis, 94, 432, 433, 533–536, 667
early Nazi propagandists, 533–534
militias and, 473
post–World War II, 534–535
See also Nazis; Pierce, William L.;
specific Aryan groups
Nero (Slave), 30
Ness, Elliot, 143, 451, 452
The Net, 260
Neutrality Proclamation, 280
Neville, John, 733, 734
The New Age, 235, 593
New Age movement, 621
New Amsterdam, 425
New deal, 333

New Deal era, 666
anticommunism and, 69, 70, 71, 159,
161, 193
banking reforms, 288, 624, 643
brown scare and, 137, 139
corporations and, 204–205
deposit insurance, 643
Rockefellers and, 624
New Delhi Patriot, 42
New England, 1–2, 300–302, 597–601
“The New International,” 611
New Jersey antiproprietary movement,
617
New Jersey State Police, 442, 443
New Left, 72, 187–188, 193, 327, 534
Yippies, 752–753
New Left Notes, 731
“New Morning, Changing Weather,” 732
New Order (group), 585
New Orleans, 280–281
New Republic, 372
New Right, 161
New Solidarity, 547
New Solidarity International Press Service
(NSIPS), 245
New World Communications, 505
New World Order (NWO), 9, 17, 21, 119,
231, 536–539
AIDS and, 44
apocalypticism, 89–90
Bank of England and, 108
Beam’s view, 119
Bilderbergers and, 123, 536
black helicopters and, 124–125
Bush and, 149, 150
Clinton and, 178
corporations and, 206, 538–539
Council on Foreign Relations and, 211
dollar bill and, 227
FEMA and, 250–251
Freemasons and, 274
identification cards and, 333–334
John Lennon and, 427
Left and, 537–538
militias and, 467, 468, 469, 471
millenarianism and, 477
mind control and, 483, 487
MK-ULTRA and, 492
Ruby Ridge and, 632–635
satanic ritual abuse and, 642
subliminal messages, 683
Y2K and, 747–748
See also One-world government
The New World Order (Robertson), 109,
474, 477, 620–621, 708
New York anti-rent movement, 617
“New York Conspiracy,” 761
New York Democratic Club, 234

911

Index

New York Journal, 710, 750
New York Police Department (NYPD),
107, 455–456
New York Protestant Association, 530, 531
New York Radical Women, 741
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE),
721–722
New York Times, 152, 411, 414, 415
on Lincoln assassination, 435
on Lusitania, 450
October Surprise and, 547–548
Pentagon Papers and, 582
Watergate and, 725
New York World, 710–711, 750
Newburgh Addresses, 540
Newburgh conspiracy, 539–541
Newcomb, Pat, 498, 499
Newman, John, 194, 565
Newsweek, 317
Newton, Huey P., 126–127, 731
Nicaragua, 179, 194, 349, 350, 574,
720–721
Nichols, Larry, 175, 178
Nichols, Terry Lynn, 144, 334, 553, 554,
555, 556
Nicholson, Francis, 425
Nickles, Don, 414, 415
Nilus, Sergey, 596
Nininger, 233
Nixon, Donald, 729
Nixon, Richard M., 117, 151, 152, 187,
223, 396, 541–542, 645, 830
anticommunism and, 68, 70, 71, 72,
159, 191, 192
Hiss and, 161, 313, 315, 326
Hughes and, 328
impeachment, 410–411
Kissinger and, 410
Moonies and, 504
Pentagon Papers and, 582–583
war on drugs, 237–238
See also Watergate
NKVD (Communist secret police), 98
Nobel, David, 172
None Dare Call It Conspiracy (Allen and
Abraham), 624
Non-Sectarian Anti-Nazi League, 138
North, Frederick, 132, 605–606
North, Gary, 232, 233, 722
North, Mark, 394
North, Oliver, 350, 351, 352
Pan Am 103 and, 572, 573
North American Aviation, 690–691
North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA), 469, 537, 559
North American Group, 691
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), 191, 432, 544

912

North Carolina Regulation, 617
Northern Michigan Regional Militia, 470
Northwest Confederacy, 202–203
Northwest Ordinance of 1787, 687
Norton, Charles D., 253
Nosair, El Sayyid, 372–373
Nosenko, Yuri, 395, 565
Nostradamus, 90
Nothing So Strange, 466
Nova Express (Burroughs), 147
NOW v. Scheidler, 34
Nowhere Man: The Final Days of John
Lennon (Rosen), 427
NRA Political Victory Fund, 519
NSC memorandum no. 68 (NSC-68), 191,
810
NSFnet, 347
Nuclear freeze movement, 542–544
Nuclear power industry, 258
Nuclear rearmament, 194
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, 543
Nullification, 225, 544–546
Number symbolism, 227
Nye, Gerald, 8
Oberg, Michael, 524
Obermaier, Otto, 294
“Objections . . . to the Proposed Federal
Constitution” (Mason), 773
O’Brien, Brian, 702
O’Brien, Cathy, 483, 486–487
O’Brien, Charles “Chuckie,” 318
O’Brien, Larry, 729
October Revolution, 596
October Surprise, 547–550
October Surprise: America’s Hostages in
Iran and the Election of Ronald
Reagan (Sick), 548
Octopus, 550
The Octopus: Secret Government and the
Death of Danny Casolaro (Thomas),
672
Odd Fellows, 273
Odio, Silvia, 390
Office for Drug Abuse and Law
Enforcement (ODALE), 237, 238
Office of Homeland Security, 251
Office of National Narcotics Intelligence
(ONNI), 237, 238
Office of Naval Research, 584, 585
Office of Special Investigations (OSI), 561
Office of Strategic Services (OSS), 156,
448
Ogden, John C., 339
Oglesby, Carl, 194, 396
Ohio Gang, 297
Ohio Militia 17th Division, 688
Oil industry, 414–415, 550–553

Okhrana, 596
Oklahoma City bombing, 21, 228, 246,
274, 433, 553–557, 574, 708
John Doe No. 2 and “others unknown,”
555–557
lone wolf theory, 553–554
McVeigh and militias, 144, 230–231,
467, 468, 473, 474, 634
militias and, 119, 212, 471, 520, 537,
554–555
multiple John Doe No. 2s, 556–557
opinion polls, 563
Turner Diaries and, 535, 585
Waco and, 718
The Oklahoma City Bombing and the
Politics of Terror (Hoffman), 231
Old Time Gospel Hour, 176
Oligarchs, 424
Oliver, Lord North, 184
Olmstead Air Force Base, 103
O’Loughlin, Patrick, 426
Olsen, Frank, 448, 486, 491
Olson, Norm, 470–471, 472
Olympia Press, 147
“The Omaha Platform,” 798
Omnibus Crime Bill, 469
On the Trail of the Assassins (Garrison),
676
On the Waterfront, 493
Onassis, Aristotle, 557–558, 559
160th Special Aviation Regiment, 126
One of Ours (Cather), 282
Oneida (boat), 312
O’Neill, John, 649
One-world government, 477, 558–559
Bush Sr. and, 149
Council on Foreign Relations and,
210–211, 288
Liberty Lobby and, 433
militias and, 472
Posse Comitatus view of, 592
Protocols of the Elders of Zion and, 595
Rockefellers and, 624
United Nations and, 707
See also New World Order
Only Yesterday (Allen), 142
Ono, Yoko, 426, 427
Opechanacanough, 524
Operation BREAKFAST, 151–152
Operation CLOVERLEAF, 199
Operation CUMULUS, 199
Operation DANIEL BOONE, 151–152
Operation GEMSTONE, 434, 541, 725, 729
Operation GLADIO, 231
Operation HOODWINK, 186
Operation MENU, 152
Operation MIDNIGHT CLIMAX, 157, 448,
486, 491

Index

Operation Mind Control (Bowart), 491
Operation MOCKINGBIRD, 485, 486
Operation MONGOOSE, 153
Operation NORTHWOODS, 117
Operation OCTOPUS, 485
Operation PAPERCLIP, 140, 560–561, 691,
869
Operation PIERCE ARROW, 690
Operation RANCH HAND, 41
Operation RESCUE, 33
Operation SANDWEDGE, 725
Operation SHAMROCK, 521–522
Operation Snow (Pavlov), 316
Operation STAUNCH, 349
Operation SUNDEVIL, 295
“Operation Vampire Killer 2000,”
536–537, 848
Opinion polls, 561–564
AIDS and drugs, 562
JFK assassination, 561–562
Pearl Harbor, 562
trust in government, 563
UFOs, 563
Opium Exclusion Act, 236
OPLAN-34A (Operations Plan 34 Alpha),
689
Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 99, 324
Orage, A. R., 593
Order. See Skull and Bones Society
The Order, 167, 470
Order (Bruders Schweigen), 633
Order (group), 535
Order of American Knights, 201, 202
Order of Free and Accepted Masons, 269
Order of the Eastern Star, 273–274
Order of the File and Claw, 657
Order of the Illuminati. See Illuminati
Order of the Solar Temple, 90
Order of the Sons of Italy in America
(OSIA), 453
Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, 66,
413, 531
Order of United Americans, 530
Order (Silent Brotherhood), 121
Organization of African Unity (OAU), 456
Organization of Afro-American Unity, 173
Organized crime, 451. See also Mafia
Organized Crime Control Act of 1970,
619
Ornitz, Samuel, 319
Orwell, George, 356
Osborne, Albert, 690
Osborne, Sarah, 639, 640, 740
Osgood, David, 221
Ostend Manifesto, 660–661
Oswald, Lee Harvey, 231, 340, 388–391,
564–569, 630–632, 816
CIA and, 157, 388–390, 393

from communist novice to U.S. Marine,
388, 564–565
Cuba and, 389–390, 567
death of, 140, 220, 383, 567–568, 630,
631
exhumation, 395
FBI and, 388, 389–390, 394–395
framing, 390–391
impostors, 390
in JFK, 676, 677
KGB and, 390, 565, 566
Left and, 564, 566–567
legacy, 568
lone gunman theory, 384, 723
Mafia and, 564, 566–567
marksmanship, 564–565
mind control and, 394, 458, 486, 568,
610, 672
motives, 391
in New Orleans, 389–390
as patsy, 231, 291, 386, 390
Russian years, 388, 565–566
Warren Commission report, 723–724
See also Kennedy, John F., Jr.,
assassination; Ruby, Jack
Oswald, Marguerite, 564, 632
Oswald’s Tale (Mailer), 565, 566, 679, 860
Otis, Gray, 52
Our Dumb Century, 396
Our Stolen Future (Colborne), 310
Outcault, R. F., 750
The Outlaw Bank (Beaty and Gwynne),
106
Overholser, Wilfred, 594
Overland Trail, 524
Overseas Library Program, 462
Owners of America, 143
Oxbow Corporation, 414–415
Ozawa v. United States, 97
Pacific Asian Group, 691
Pacific Fleet, 579, 626
Pacific Institute, 371
The Package, 257
Packard, Vance, 485, 682
Paganism, Greco-Roman, 593
Page, Walter, 757
Paine, Thomas, 367, 511, 529
Pak Bo Hi, 505
Pakistan, 650
Pakula, Alan J., 571
Palestine, 572
Palestinian Liberation Organization, 573
Palmer, A. Mitchell, 7, 611, 614, 637, 806
Palmer, Elihu, 511
Palmer, Perain P., 284
Palmer Raids, 88, 463, 611
Pan Am 103, 571–574

Pan Am 103 (Cohen and Cohen), 574
Panama Canal, 574–576
Panther 21, 651–652
Papal conspiracy, 4, 6. See also Catholic
Church
The Parallax View (Pakula), 260, 571
Paramilitary organizations, 138, 421. See
also Militias
Paranoia, 222, 576–578
projection, 576
as psychiatric disorder, 594
psychological definitions, 576–577
See also Mind control
Paranoia, 44
Paranoid, as term, 577
Paranoid style, 19–20, 21, 85, 234, 248,
464, 536, 601
“The Paranoid Style in American Politics”
(Hofstadter), ix, 577
Parascope, 125
The Parasite Murders, 215
Parent, Steve, 459
Parfrey, Adam, 231
Paris peace talks, 541, 596
Park, Gary, 178
Parker, Calvin, 703
Parker, Theodore, 136
Parkman, Francis, 588, 762
Parks, Jerry, 176
Parks, Rosa, 419
Parmenter, Frederick, 637
Parris, Samuel, 2, 639, 640, 740, 741
Parry, Robert, 181
Parsons, Albert, 304, 305
Parsons, Hugh, 739
Parsons, Mary, 739
Participatory democracy, 681
Party system, 51
Passport to the Cosmos: Human
Transformations and Alien
Encounters (Mack), 703
Patler, John, 534
Patriarchy, 578–579
Patrick, Robert, 743
Patriot Act, 649
Patriot movement, 90, 119, 143–144, 231,
276, 334, 467, 470, 586, 669, 708
FEMA and, 250–251
Oklahoma City bombing and, 554
Waco and, 717
Patriot Report, 472
Patterson, James W., 213, 214
Patton, Ron, 482, 492
Paul, Ralph, 631
Paul, William, 715
Pavlov, I. P., 484
Pavlov, Vitaly, 316
Paxton Boys massacre, 526–527

913

Index

Paxton Boys Regulation, 617
Pazder, Lawrence, 642
Peace movement, 542–544
Peace Treaty of 1782, 687
Pearl, Daniel, 650
Pearl Harbor, 8, 138, 231, 364–366, 562,
579–582, 626
historical context, 581–582
“Pearl Harbor: Mother of All
Conspiracies” (Willey), 874
Pearson, David, 382
Pecora, Ferdinand, 722
Peeples, Curtis, 125, 629
Pelley, William Dudley, 9, 83, 138, 139,
653–655, 666
Peltier, Leonard, 57, 188
Pemisapan, 524
Penceel, William, 715
Penitentiary culture, 607
Pentagon. See September 11 terrorist
attacks
Pentagon Papers, 188, 411–412, 434, 500,
582–583, 681, 725, 829
People’s Antimonopoly Party, 589
People’s Constitutional Convention, 235
People’s Party of the U.S.A., 589–590
People’s Temple, 90, 377–379
Pequot War, 600
Percy, David, 501
Perdomo, José, 426
Perjury (Weinstein), 161
Permanent Subcommittee on
Investigations, 462
Peros, Steven, 312
Perot, H. Ross, 548
Persian Gulf Syndrome, 290–291
Pesticide dangers, 310
Peters, Pete, 119, 473
Peters, Richard, 54
Peterson, Merrill, 438
Pflock, Karl, 629
Pharaon, Ghaith, 107
Phelps, Dawson A., 430
Phelps, John Wolcott, 274
Phi Beta Kappa, 273
Philadelphia, 52, 92–93, 513–514
Philadelphia Convention, 225
Philadelphia experiment, 583–585
The Philadelphia Experiment (film), 584
Philadelphia Special Investigation
Commission, 514
Philanthropic organizations, 623, 645
Philip, Prince, 246
Philip, sachem of Pokanoket, 524–525
Philip Dru, Administrator (Warburg), 253
Phillips, Stephen H., 303
Phillips, Wendell, 4
Philosophes, 115

914

Phipps, Charles, 276
Phips, William, 639, 740, 741
Phoenix, 226
Pickering, Timothy, 54, 301–302
Pierce, Bruce, 121
Pierce, Franklin, 661
Pierce, William L., 173, 534, 554,
585–587, 758
Pierre Free Press, 284
Pilgrims, 525
Pine Ridge Reservation, 56, 57, 283, 284
Pinkerton, Allan, 493, 495
Pinkertons, 345, 492
Pinkney, Charles Cotesworth, 745, 746
Pioneer Fund, 243
Pionzio, Dino, 656
Pipes, Daniel, 116, 230, 538, 551
Pitcavage, Mark, 472, 473, 475
Pitt, William, 60–61
Pittsburgh Tribune-Review, 175–176
Pizzo, Frank L., 513
Place of Dead Roads (Burroughs), 147
Plane Truth (Davies), 573
A Planned Deception (Cumbey), 621
Plasma weapons, 488
A Plea for the West (Beecher), 66, 530
Plessy v. Ferguson, 171
Plot lines, 9–10
Plumbers, 434, 542, 583, 725–726
Plymouth Colony, 525
Pogue, John, 657
Poindexter, George, 362
Poindexter, John, 350, 351, 352
Pokanokets, 524, 525
Poland, 749–750
Polanski, Roman, 459, 642
Police Against the New World Order
(PANWO), 251, 536–537, 708, 848
Police misconduct, 513–514
Political parties, 48–49
Polk, James K., 464–465
Ponder, K. B., 447
Pontecorvo, Bruno, 98
Pontiac, 522, 525, 526, 587–589, 670
Poole, Elijah. See Muhammad, Elijah
The Poor Man’s James Bond (Saxon), 683
Poor People’s Campaign, 408
The Poor Pope, 370
Poor Righteous Teachers, 607
Pop sociology, 21
Pope, 4. See also Catholic Church;
Vatican
The Pope’s Secrets (Alamo), 370–371
Popper, Karl, 17, 18
Popular Front, 69, 161
Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine (PFLP-GC), 572
Popular Health Movement (PHM), 306

Populist Party, 6, 82, 141, 233–234,
589–590
Populists, 252, 433, 505, 589–591, 618,
623
Port Huron Statement, 680–681
Posner, Gerald, 564, 566, 679
Posse Comitatus, 197, 275, 334, 473,
591–592, 664, 683, 758
Possessive individualism, 23
Postmodernism, 222, 483, 603
Poulsen, Kevin, 295
Pound, Ezra, 592–595
Powell, Lewis, 435, 437
Powers, Francis Gary, 521
Powers, Richard, 72, 195
Powhatan, 524
Prairie Fire: The Politics of Revolutionary
Anti-Imperialism (Weather
Underground), 732–733
Pratt, Geronimo, 187
Pratt, Larry, 470, 473
Pratt, Ray, 23
Pravda, 42
Premillenarianism, 86–87, 323–233,
477–478
Premillennial dispensationalism, 445,
476–477
Preminger, Otto, 321
The President’s Daughter (Britton), 299
Preston, Thomas, 130, 131
Prince Hall Freemasons, 274
Principia Discordia (Hill and Thornley),
340
Prioleau, John, 715
Prioleau, Peter, 715
Prisons, 182, 607
Pritchard, David, 703
Privacy Foundation, 334
Privateers, 279–280
Proclamation 4417, 366
Proclamation of 1763, 670, 687
Proclamation of Neutrality, 279
Proctor, Elizabeth, 640
Prodigy, 607
Profiles in Populism (Carto), 433
“A Program of Covert Action against the
Castro Regime,” 117
Progress and Poverty (George), 341
Progressive Era, 6, 249, 532, 693, 735–736
Progressive Labor Party (PLP), 423
Progressive party, 205
Progressive Party of Wisconsin, 462
Prohibition, 249, 343, 419, 438
Mafia and, 451, 452
Prohibitionists, 6, 179
Project ARTICHOKE, 157, 486, 490–491
Project BLUE BOOK, 700, 701–702
Project BLUEBIRD, 486, 490–491

Index

Project CHATTER, 486, 490–491
Project GRUDGE, 700
Project L.U.C.I.D., 482
Project MEGIDDO, 468
Project MINARET, 522
Project MONARCH, 482, 484, 486–487, 492
Project SIGN, 700
Projection, 576
Prokes, Michael, 379
Pro-Life-Action Network, 33
PROMIS, 466, 655
Proofs of a Conspiracy (Bishop), 339, 782
Proofs of a Conspiracy (Robison), 115,
272, 337, 338, 511–512, 621–622,
777
Property rights, 617
Proposition 187, 533
The Prospect Before Us (Callender), 135
Prosser, Gabriel, 694
Prostitution, 448, 735–737
Protestant Reformation, 369, 598
Protestants, 1, 73, 474
antisemitism, 80
apocalypticism, 85
Fundamentalism, 88–89
nativism and, 530–531
Quebec Act and, 605–606
Second Great Awakening, 30
Protocols of the Elders of Zion, 7–8, 67,
83–84, 88, 116, 167, 209, 321, 322,
594–597, 666, 803
composition of, 595–596
early history of, 596–597
Ku Klux Klan and, 418, 420
militias and, 473
one-world government and, 559
Prouty, Fletcher, 627, 676, 677
Provence, 592–593
Provenzano, Anthony, 317
Provisional Army of the North, 32
Proxy intervention, 189, 191
Prusakova, Marina (Oswald), 565, 566
Psychological theories, 86
Public Enemy, 452, 607
Public Key Encryption, 242
Public school system, 66
Publishers, 201, 755–756
Pudeator, Ann, 640
Puerto Rican Independence Movement,
186
Pujo, Arsene P., 253, 507
Pujo Committee, 507
Pulitzer, Joseph, 710
Pulse Wave Detonation Engine (PWDE),
198
Pulsipher, Jenny Hale, 526
Pumpkin Papers, 160, 314–315
Pumpkin Papers Irregulars, 161

Pumpkin Seed, 91, 100
The Puppet Masters, 257
Pure Food Act of 1906, 307
Puritans, 1–2, 17–18, 330–331, 338, 476,
597–601, 739
anti-Catholicism, 65, 66
immigration and, 529
Morse and, 512
Native Americans and, 522–523
See also Salem witch trials
Purple Code, 580, 581
Putnam, Thomas, 640
Pynchon, Thomas, 601–604
Pyramid, 226–227
Quakers, 28, 29, 423, 599
Quartering Act, 184, 185
Quebec Act, 184–185, 605–606
Quigley, Carroll, 175, 822
Quimby, Phineas Parkhurst, 168, 169
Quincy, Josiah, 60, 131
Quinn, Sandra Crouse, 45
Quintanilla, Hector, 702
Rabid, 215
Race Betterment Foundation, 243
Rachkovsky, Pyotr Ivanovich, 596
Racism, 35, 36, 40, 167
fears of intermarriage, 416–417, 419
as internal colonialism, 173
Japanese-Americans and, 364
militias and, 467, 472–473
red scare and, 611
See also Antisemitism; Eugenics
Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt
Organization (RICO) statute, 34,
452, 619–620
Radical feminism, 578
Radical Republicans, 6, 416, 439
Radicalism, 51, 612. See also Anarchists;
Industrial Workers of the World;
Socialists
Radio Free America, 433
Radio Free Europe, 504
Radio Frequency Mission Planner
(RFMP), 198
Radio programs, 33, 117, 120–121,
177–178, 207, 435, 501, 586, 640,
704
Coughlin, 207–210
Rahv, Philip, 161
Railroads, 213–214, 574, 590, 623, 661,
692
J. P. Morgan and, 505–506
Rainbow Coalition, 37
Ram Dass, 672
Ramey, Roger M., 628
Ramsay, Robin, 691

The Ram’s Horn, 136
Rand, Ayn, 431
Rand, Howard, 167, 667
Randall, James G., 439
Randle, Kevin D., 12, 629
Randolph, Edmund, 224
Rankin, John E., 325
Rap music, 607–609, 651–652
Rapid City Journal, 274
Rappaport, Jon, 44
Rappelyea, George W., 142
Rapture, 11, 170, 445, 559
Rassinier, Paul, 322
Rationalism, 741
Rationalization, 484
Ray, James Earl, 404, 409, 610
aliases, 402–403, 406–407
Ray, Robert, 738
Reagan, Ronald, 205, 212, 246, 723
as Antichrist, 39
anticommunism, 72, 161
assassination attempt on, 149–150, 220,
427, 609–610
conspiracist groups and, 374, 669
immigration and, 533
Iran-Contra and, 349–353
KAL 007 and, 381–383
libertarian principles, 432
Moonies and, 504
nuclear freeze movement and, 542–544
October Surprise theory and, 547–550
oil industry and, 552
states rights and, 546
Trilateral Commission and, 692
Reagan Doctrine, 194
Real IRA, 354
Real Whig tradition, 61
Realist, 672
Reciprocity Treaty, 302, 303
Reconstruction, 5–6, 171, 232, 416–417,
438, 439
Red decade, 69, 159
Red Menace, 191
Red scares, 3, 541, 610–614
1920s, 20, 62, 69, 463, 611–612, 637
1947–1955, 612–613
IWW and, 346
Red summer of 1919, 614–617
“Re-Declaration of Independence,” 537
Redford, Charles, 412
Reebok, 38, 39
Reece Committee Report, 814
Reed, Joseph, 93
Reed, Rebecca, 497
Reefer Madness, 238
Rees, John, 645
Reeves, Dana, 426
Reform Party, 669

915

Index

“Reformation of Manners” (Puritans), 600
Reformed Christianity, 722
Refutations, 18–19
Regan, Don, 351
Regent University Law School, 232
Regionalism, 224, 300–301
“A Regular, Systematic Plan”
(Washington), 768
Regulator movements, 617–618
Shays’ Rebellion, 652–653
Reign of Terror, 229
Reilly, Edward, 443–444
Rejewski, Marian, 242
“Remarks by the President in Apology for
Study Done in Tuskegee” (Clinton),
868
“Remarks on the Quebec Bill” (Hamilton),
769
Remington, Frederic, 750–751
Remington, William, 326
Remote viewing, 120, 487
René, Ralph, 501
Reno, Janet, 106, 144, 175, 473, 705, 718
Rense, Jeff, 198, 704
Rensselaer, Stephen Van, III, 77
Rensselaer, Stephen Van, IV, 77, 79
Rensselaer, William, 77
Report from Iron Mountain, 618–619
Report of the Select Committee on
Assassinations, 836
“Report on CIA Chilean Task Force
Activities,” 827
Report on Public Credit (Hamilton), 110
“Report on the Covert Activities on the
Central Intelligence Agency”
(Doolittle Committee), 815
Reproductive technology, 21
Republic National Committee, 177
Republican Party, 5, 28, 77, 414
anti-Catholicism and, 66
APA and, 58
Bank of the United States and, 111
Christian Coalition and, 620
Copperheads and, 201–202
gold standard and, 590
Hamilton and, 296
Hartford Convention and, 300–302
Hiss and, 313
Jefferson and, 367
John Birch Society and, 373–374
McCarthy and, 462–463
Radical Republicans, 416, 439
San Francisco, 641–642
1790s, 49, 51, 53–54
Slave Power and, 658, 661
Yalta conference and, 748–750
See also American Republican Party
Republican Union League, 202

916

Research Laboratory of Electronics
(MIT), 293
Resister, 144
“Return of Several Ministers” (Mather),
740–741
Revelation, Book of, 2, 10
anti-Catholicism and, 65
Antichrist, 10, 39
apocalypticism and, 86
identification and, 333–335, 708
Jews, view of, 168, 445
Manson and, 459
militias and, 474
millenarianism and, 445, 477–478, 559
See also Biblical prophecies
Revelry (Adams), 299
Reverse engineering, 91
Revisionist history, 626
“Revolution 9” (Beatles), 459
Revolutionary generation, 1–2
Revolutionary millenarians, 477
Revolutionary Radicalism: Its History,
Purpose, and Tactics, 611
Revolutionary Youth Movement II (RYM
II), 731
Reynolds, William, 303
Rhetoric of conspiracy, 191–193
Rhetoric of infection, 70
Rhode Island, 234
Rhode Island Suffrage Association, 235
Rhodes, Cecil, 483
Richard, William, 514
Richardson, Ebenezeer, 131
Richardson, Elliot, 726, 727
Richardson, William A., 201
Richardson, William H., 641
Richelieu, Cardinal, 242
Rickover, H. G., 711
Ricouer, Paul, 577
Riegle, Don, 644
Right, 9–10, 20, 21
anti-Castro, 152
identification cards and, 333
KAL conspiracy theories and, 382–383
one-world government and, 558–559
publications, 708
view of Roosevelt, 626–627
Riley, Glenda, 524
Riley, William B., 83
Rinehart, Dr., 584
Rio Grande, 465
“Riot Year” of 1834, 361
Riots, 39, 126
anti-Catholic, 66
anti-rent war, 77–79
Asian Americans, 96
Boston Massacre, 60
Chicago, 616

nativism and, 530–531
racism and, 36–37
red summer of 1919, 614–617
Weathermen and, 731
Ripley, Walter, 637
Ritalin, 469
Rivas, Patricio, 71
The River (Hooper), 46
Rivera, David Allen, 866
Rivero, Michael, 864
Rivers, Mendel, 702
Rizdon Beezley, 450
RKO, 312–313
Roanoke Island, 524
Robber Barons, 693
The Robber Barons (Josephson), 204
Robert, George, 456
Roberts, Lawrence, 347
Robertson, H. P., 701
Robertson, Pat, 176, 232, 474, 477, 536,
620–621, 708, 838
on Bank of England, 108, 109
Book of Revelation and, 10, 445
Clinton, view of, 176
view of Wall Street, 721
Robertson Panel, 701
Robespierre, 367, 511
Robideau, Bob, 57
Robinson, Beverly, 93
Robison, John, 87–88, 115, 116, 272, 273,
337–338, 511–512, 621–622, 777
Rockefeller, David, 124, 624
Rockefeller, John D., 469, 637
charitable donations, 243, 623
Federal Reserve System and, 253
gold standard and, 288
Morgan and, 505, 507
Standard Oil and, 551, 693
stock market crash of 1929 and, 673
Trilateral Commission and, 691–692
Rockefeller, John, Jr., 624
Rockefeller, Nelson Aldrich, 624
Rockefeller, William, 623
Rockefeller, Winthrop, 624
Rockefeller Commission, 158, 448, 491,
542
Rockefeller family, 109, 124, 210, 558,
609, 623–624
health scares and, 306–307
Rockefeller Internationalist: The Man Who
Misrules the World (Josephson), 210,
623–624, 813
Rockefeller-Farben combine, 623
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis, 210
Rockwell, George Lincoln, 420, 534–535,
586
Rocky Mountain Rendezvous, 473
Roe v. Wade, 33

Index

Rogers, Robert, 525
Rohm, Elizabeth, 743
Roland, Jon, 144, 468
Romney, Jonathan, 259
Roosevelt, Elliott, 627
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 69, 88, 196, 446,
472, 624–627
anticommunism and, 8–9, 70, 159
banking and, 254–255, 288
brown scare and, 137, 139
Coughlin and, 209
Japanese Americans and, 366
NSA and, 521
Pearl Harbor and, 579, 581
Posse Comitatus views of, 591
as soft on communism, 8–9, 313
stock market crash of 1929 and, 673,
674
Yalta conference and, 748–750
Roosevelt, Theodore, 6, 236, 311, 312,
575, 693, 803
Roscoe, Theodore, 439
Rose Law Firm, 176, 738
Rosecrans, William S., 202
Roselli, Johnny, 393, 395
Rosemary’s Baby, 642
Rosen, Robert, 427
Rosenbaum, Ron, 656
“Rosenberg Sons’ Statement on the FortyFifth Anniversary of Their Parents’
Execution,” 872
Rosenbergs, 70, 99, 160, 161, 564, 713,
714
Ross, Andrew, 294
Ross, Ricky, 180, 182, 183
Ross, Robert Gaylon, Sr., 883
Rossignol, Antoine, 242
Rossignol, Bonaventure, 242
Roswell (television show), 627
Roswell Army Air Field, 628
Roswell Daily Record, 699
Roswell incident, 9, 12, 158, 627–630,
699–700, 703–704, 744
The Roswell Incident (Berlitz and Moore),
628
Roswell myth, 627–630
The Roswell Report: Case Closed
(McAndrew), 629
Rotch, Francis, 132–133
Rothbard, Murray, 431, 432
Rothmyer, Karen, 646
Rothschild family, 8, 82, 469, 624
Bank of England and, 108, 109, 288
Bilderbergers and, 124
Council on Foreign Relations and, 624
Illuminati and, 621
J. P. Morgan and, 505, 506
Wall Street and, 722

Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP),
406–407, 409
Royal Society of Edinburgh, 622
Royer, Daniel F., 284
Rubin, Jerry, 165, 166, 194, 752–753
Rubinstein, Richard E., 228
Ruby, Jack, 220, 383, 384, 388, 391–392,
567–568, 630–632, 677, 723. See also
Kennedy, John F., Jr., assassination;
Oswald, Lee Harvey
Ruby Ridge, 89, 632–635
BATF and, 143, 144, 520, 555, 633–634
militia views of, 126, 197, 276, 467, 473,
718
Ruckelshaus, William, 728
Rudy, Christopher, 176, 646
Ruffin, Edmund, 27
Rumor and legend, 35
Ruppelt, Edward J., 700, 701
Ruppert, Michael C., 875
Rusconi, Jane, 676
Rush, Benjamin, 225
Rush, Richard, 688
Rushdoony, Rousas John, 232, 233, 722
Russbacher, Gunther, 540
Russell, Francis, 299
Russell, Gilbert, 429
Russell, William H., 656
Russian Revolution, 355, 463, 610
Russo, Anthony, 583
Russo-Japanese War, 96, 364, 749
Rust, Zad, 164
Ryan, Leo, 377, 378, 379
Sacco, Nicola, 62, 637–638
Sacco and Vanzetti, 637–638
St. Bartholomew Massacre, 64
St. Clair, Arthur, 280
St. Cross Episcopal Church, 642
Saint John de Crèvecoeur, Hector, 529
St. Leger Grenfell, George, 203
Sakhalin Island, 381, 749
Salameh, Mohammed, 372
Salem witch trials, 2, 306, 476, 739,
740–741
conspiracy theories, 639–640
Saler, Benson, 630
Salewicz, Chris, 676
Salinger, J. D., 426, 427–428
Salinger, Pierre, 697
Salt Lake City, 251
Sambor, Gregor, 514
“Sambo’s Mistakes” (Brown), 136
Samerjan, John, 317
Samford, John, 701
Samson, Peter, 293
San Francisco Conference, 313
San Francisco Examiner, 181

San Francisco Herald, 719
San Francisco spy scandal (1994), 246
San Francisco Vigilance Committee,
640–642
San José Mercury News, 179, 180,
183
Sanborn, Franklin Benjamin, 136
Sanborn, Peter, 273
Sandburg, Carl, 438
Sanders, James, 696–697
Sanderson, John, 202
Sandinistas, 180, 350
Sarah Scaife Foundation, 645
Sarant, Alfred, 99
The Satanic Bible (La Vey), 642
Satanic cults, 274, 703
cattle mutilations and, 153–155
Satanic ritual abuse (SRA), 642–643
The Satan Seller (Warnke), 642
Saturday Night Massacre, 728
Saturn rockets, 560
Saudi Arabia, 552
Saunders, Bob, 293
Savings and loan crisis, 643–645
Whitewater scandal, 737–738
Sawyer, Charles, 299
Saxon, Kurt, 683
Saxons, 168
Scaife, Richard Mellon, 175–176, 177,
645–646
A Scanner Darkly (Dick), 222
Scanners, 215
Scapegoating, 20–21, 86, 89, 161, 360,
741
Schaack, Michael, 62
Schaeffer, Francis A., 647
Scheidler, Joseph, 33
Schiff, Irwin, 342
Schiff, Jacob, 624
Schine, G. David, 463
Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr., 71, 161
Schlesinger, Arthur, Sr., 63
Schmitt, Donald R., 12, 629
Schnaubelt, Rudolph, 304
Schreber, Daniel Paul, 262, 576
Schroder, Eugene, 196
Schulte, Valerie, 401
Schuyler, Philip, 92
Schwab, Michael, 304, 305
Schwartz, Anna J., 674
Schwartz, Delmore, 577
Schwarzkopf, Norman, 443, 444
Schweitzer, LeRoy, 275–276
Science, suspicion of, 513
Science and Health (Eddy), 168
Science experimentation, 488
Science fiction, 90, 214–216, 222–224,
484

917

Index

Scientific experimentation, 43, 45, 157,
199
Tuskegee syphilis experiments, 35, 38,
45, 183, 309, 577
Scientific inquiry, 483
Scientists, Operation PAPERCLIP and,
560–561
Scientology, 646–647
Scofield, Cyrus, 477
Scofield Reference Bible, 477
Scopes, John T., 142
Scopes trial, 67, 142
Scott, Adrian, 318
Scott, Cathy, 652
Scott, Dred, 5, 661
Scott, Peter Dale, 72, 194, 395, 396, 541,
564, 567, 729
Scottish Rite, 58, 226
Scrowcroft, Brett, 352
Seal, Barry, 175
Seale, Bobby, 126, 165
Seaman, Fred, 427
Seamans, Robert C., 702
The Search for the Manchurian Candidate
(Marks), 458, 486, 491
Seattle protests (1999), 538–539
Sebring, Jay, 459
Secord, Richard, 351–353
Secrecy: The American Experience
(Powers and Moynihan), 195
Secret Agenda: Watergate, Deep Throat
and the CIA (Hougan), 729
Secret agents, 148
The Secret AIDS Genocide Plot
(Cantwell), 44
Secret (dark lantern) societies, 201–202,
256, 335, 656
Secret and Suppressed: Banned Ideas and
Hidden History (Keith), 577
The Secret Government: The Origin,
Identity, and Purpose of MJ-12
(Cooper), 704
Secret Honor (Altman), 258, 541
Secret Instructions of the Society of Jesus,
370
Secret Life: Firsthand Accounts of UFO
Abductions (Jacobs), 703
The Secret Relationship between Blacks
and Jews: Volume One (Farrakhan),
518
Secret Service, 144, 295, 384, 398, 408,
437, 610
Secret Six, 136, 137
Secular humanism, 89, 424, 468,
647–648
Sedition, Zenger and, 755–756. See
also Alien and Sedition Acts
(1798)

918

Sedition and Subversive Activities Act of
1953, 613
The Seditionist, 119
Segal, Jakob, 43
Segal, Lilli, 43
Select Committee on Intelligence
Activities, 194
Seligman Brothers, 506
Sellier, Charles, 439–440
Semmes, Richard T., 203
Senate Judiciary Committee, 437, 438
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence,
158, 182, 448, 650
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
Hearing on MKULTRA, 834
Senatorial Privilege (Damore), 163–164
September 11 terrorist attacks, 23, 126,
158, 228, 230, 274, 282, 446, 626,
648–651
as government plot, 21, 251, 626
ID cards and, 334
Jesuits and, 371
Jewish Defense League and, 372–373
Microsoft and, 466
militias and, 470
New World Order and, 539
oil industry and, 552–553
Wall Street and, 722, 723
Serbia, 322
A Sermon, Exhibiting the Present Dangers
(Morse), 781
Serrano, Sandra, 400–401
Seven Days in May, 256
700 Club, 176, 477
Seven Years’ War, 60, 132, 184, 588, 670
Seventh Day Adventists, 480, 651, 717
Sewall, Samuel, 599
Seward, William, 76, 303, 435, 438, 439
Slave Power and, 658, 659
Seward, William H., 77, 414
Sex slaves, 486–487
Sexuality, Ku Klux Klan fears of, 416–417,
418
Shaaban, Youssef, 573
Shabazz, Betty, 247
Shabazz, Qubilah, 247
Shadow Conspiracy, 260
Shadow government, 541
Shadow Hawk (Herbert Zinn), 294
Shah of Iran, 156
Shakur, Afeni, 651–652
Shakur, Tupac, 607, 651–652
Shallett, Sidney, 700
Shandera, Jamie, 489, 490, 628–629
Share Our Wealth Society, 446, 666
Sharp, Ulysses S. Grant, 690
Shaver, Richard, 223
Shaw, Clay, 157, 392, 676, 677, 678

Shays, Daniel, 653
Shays’ Rebellion, 617, 652–653, 668
Shea, Donald, 460
Shea, Robert, 339–341
Sheeple, 480, 481, 488
Sheikh, Ahmad Omar, 650
“Shell Extension City: The True Story”
(Helmer), 882
Shelton, Robert, 419
Sheridan, Philip, 66
Sheriff, 591, 592
Sherman, Edwin A., 370
Sherman Anti-Trust Act, 623, 693
Sherman Silver Purchase Act, 287–288,
506, 590
Shermer, Michael, 322
Shimomura, Tsutomu, 295
Shippen, Margaret, 93, 94
Shippen, William, 93
Short, Walter, 8, 579–581
Short History of Paper Money and
Banking in the United States
(Gouge), 113, 790
A Short Narrative of the Horrid Massacre
in Boston, 766
Shultz, George, 350, 351
Sibrel, Bart, 501
Sick, Gary, 548–549
The Siege, 256
Sight and Sound, 313
SIGN, 489
Signal Intelligence Service, 713
Signs of the Times, 478
Sigsbee, Charles D., 710
Sihanouk, Norodom, 150, 152, 156, 158
Silent Coup: The Removal of Richard
Nixon (Colodny and Gettlin),
729–730
Silver, 285, 287–288
Populist Party and, 589–590
See also Gold standard
Silver Shirts, 8, 83, 138, 653–655, 666
Simmons, William, 417
Simpson, O. J., 39
Simpson, “Sockless Jerry,” 590
Sinclair, Upton, 693
Sioux uprising (1862), 528
Sirhan, Sirhan Bishara, 376, 397–400, 458,
609, 610
mind control and, 483, 486
Sirica, John J., 435, 726
Sitting Bull, 283, 284–285
Situationist Anarchists, 538
The Six Million Swindle (App), 322
Six Months in a Convent (Reed), 497
666 (number of the Beast), 3, 39, 86, 333,
474, 559, 708
Skeleton Key, 541, 729

Index

Skinheads, 10, 94
Skinner, B. F., 484
Sklar, Zachary, 676, 678
Skolnick, Sherman K., 105, 106, 108, 109,
176, 288, 505, 655–656
Skull and Bones Society, 149, 256, 469,
487, 656, 683
“barbarians” and, 657–658
The Skulls, 256
Slatzer, Robert, 499
Slave Power, 32, 464, 658–662
growing threat of, 660–661
origins of conspiracy, 659–660
overview, 27–28
The Slave Power Conspiracy and the
Paranoid Style (Davis), ix
Slave revolts, 2, 27, 28, 30, 662–665
Caribbean, 30, 664, 665
Denmark Vesey, 5, 694, 714–715
John Brown and, 135–137
Nat Turner, 694–696
Stono Rebellion, 679–680
Slaveocracy, 4–5
Slavery, ix, 4–5, 464, 607
Fugitive Slave Act, 276–278
Know-Nothings and, 413–414
legislation, 659
positive good argument, 659
three-fifths clause, 659, 662
See also Abolitionism; African
Americans
Sleeping Beauty program, 488
Slim, Iceberg, 173
Slocum, John Jay, 497
Slotnick, Barry, 372
Sloughter, Henry, 425
Smart cards, 334, 709
Smith, Alfred E., 67, 438
Smith, Anna Nicole, 415
Smith, Doug, 170
Smith, Gerald L. K., 8, 83, 168, 209,
666–667
Smith, Gerrit, 136
Smith, Hyram, 510
Smith, John Berry, 573
Smith, Joseph, 4
Smith, Joseph, Jr., 508–510
Smith, Matthew, 764
Smith, Michelle, 642
Smith, Rex Alan, 284
Smith Act, 9, 69, 613
Smoking Gun tape, 542, 728–729
Smoot-Hawley Tariff, 675
Sneider, Christopher, 131
Snitch-jacketing, 186
Snow, Samuel, 480
Social credit, 593
Social Darwinism, 236, 243

Social engineering, 70, 484, 486
Social Justice, 209, 210
Social sciences, 18–20
Social Security numbers, 333
Socialist Party, 289, 345
Socialist Workers Party (SWP), 161, 423
Socialist world order, 210–211
Socialists, 289, 612
Jack London, 354–356
See also Haymarket bombing; Red
scare
Society of California Pioneers, 641
Society of Jesus. See Jesuits
Society of the Cincinnati, 196, 540,
667–669
The Soft Machine (Burroughs), 147
“Solidarity Forever,” 345
Solomon, Stan, 178
Solomon’s Temple, 271
Sons of Liberty, 201, 202, 435
Sons of Satan, 154
Sorenson, Theodore, 216–217
South Africa, 38, 46, 350
South Carolina, 32–33, 545, 679–680
South Carolina Regulation, 617
South Sea Bubble, 359
Southern Christian Leadership
Conference (SCLC), 40, 187, 408
Southern Democrats, 171
Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC),
121, 472, 473, 587
Sovereign status, 334, 467
Sovereignty, of states, 544
Soviet atomic spying, 97–100
Soviet operatives, 10, 324
Soviet Union, 68–69, 612
CIA and, 156
Cuba and, 152–153
Israel and, 323
Jewish Defense League and, 372
KAL 007 and, 381–383
New World Order and, 536
nuclear freeze movement and, 544
oil industry and, 552
purges, 69
Reagan and, 609, 610
secular humanism and, 648
technology and, 625–626
VENONA Project and, 713–714
Yalta conference and, 748–750
See also Cold war
Spahn Ranch, 459
Spain, 224, 709–712
Spanish Armada, 65
Spanish Civil War, 69
Spanish-American War, 96, 311, 751
USS Maine and, 709–712
Spanknoebel, Heinz, 138

Spear, Robert K., 90
Special Report Number 14, 701
Specie, 286, 652
Specie Circular (1836), 114, 287
Specter, Arlen, 182
Spence, Gerry, 634
Spick, Benjamin, 188
Spies, August, 304, 305
Spivak, John L., 625
“Spot Resolution” (Lincoln), 792
Spotlight, 144, 198, 199, 250, 432, 433,
471, 535, 555, 655, 669–670
Sprague, Richard, 409, 832
Sprenger, Johann, 642
Spying, 97–100
Stalin, Joseph, 69, 190, 565, 612, 624, 627
Yalta conference and, 748–750
Stalinist purges, 159
Stamp Act, 59–60, 132, 670–672
Stamp Act Congress, 671
Standard Oil Company, 551, 623, 693
Standing Rock, 284
Stang, Ivan, 170
Stanley, Harold, 656
Stanton, Edwin, 129–130, 435, 437, 439,
440
Star Trek: First Contact, 259
Star Wars, 488
Starr, Kenneth W., 178, 645, 738
State Department, 43, 160, 191, 347, 389
“Statement at unansweredquestions.org
Press Conference” (Ruppert), 875
“Statement on the 30th Anniversary of
Robert Kennedy’s Assassination”
(Teeter), 871
States, nullification and, 544–546
States’ rights, 420, 545, 546
State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee,
560
Steamshovel Press, 44, 672–673
Stearns, George L., 136, 137
Steganography, 241
Steiger, Brad, 121
Steinberg, Jeffrey, 246
Stempel, Guido H., III, 561, 563
“Step 5,” 121
The Stepford Wives, 257, 578
Stephens, Charles, 405
Stephens, Grace, 405, 406
Stephenson, David C., 67, 418
Stereo, 215
Sterilization, 38, 243
Sterling, Bruce, 295
Stern, Ken, 474
Stettinius, Edward, Jr., 750
Stevens, Aaron, 136
Stevens, John Paul, 655
Stevenson, Adlai, III, 424

919

Index

Stewart, David, 362
Stidger, Felix, 203
Stimoceiver, 483, 487–488
Stimson, Henry Lewis, 656
Stinger missiles, 697, 698
Stitt, Louis, 691
Stock market crash of 1929, 254, 673–675,
722
Stockman, Steve, 144
Stone, Oliver, 11, 118, 383, 392, 549, 565,
675–679
Stone, William L., 497
Stono Rebellion, 679–680
Storey, Wilbur, 201
Story, Joseph, 545
The Strange Death of Marilyn Monroe
(Capell), 499
The Strange Death of President Harding
(Means), 299
A Strange Harvest (Howe), 154
Strange Weather: Culture, Science, and
Technology in the Age of Limits
(Ross), 294
Strassmeir, Andeas, 556
Strategy of tension, 231
Strecker, Robert, 43, 45
Strecker Group, 43
The Strecker Memorandum, 43
Strieber, Whitley, 120, 121, 703
Striecher, Julius, 138
Strikes, 345
black strike breakers, 614–615
Colorado, 355
1870s and 1880s, 532
red scare and, 611–612
Stringfield, Leonard H., 628
Strong, Benjamin, 674
Stuart, J. E. B., 136
Stuart, John (Earl of Bute), 60
Student Non-Violent Coordinating
Committee (SNCC), 72
Students for a Democratic Society (SDS),
72, 165, 188, 194, 423, 680–682. See
also Weathermen
Students League for Industrial Democracy
(SLID), 680
Studies in Intelligence, 702
Stupid White Men (Moore), 539
Sturges, John, 500
Sturgis, Frank, 542, 726, 729
Sturrock, Peter, 704–705
SubGeniuses, 170–171
Sub-humans, 424
Subliminal advertising, 484, 682–683
Suez Canal, 376, 574
Sugar Act, 670
Summers, Anthony, 194, 541, 564, 565,
566

920

Sumner, Charles, 658, 661
Sunni Islam, 518
The Suppressed Truth about the
Assassination of Abraham Lincoln
(McCarty), 438
Supreme Court, 5, 97, 122, 171, 203, 620,
648, 655, 755
abortion rulings, 33, 34
Bush and, 150
on Dorr War, 235–236
Dred Scott v. Sanford, 661
HUAC and, 326, 327
Supreme Court of Judicature, New York
City, 761
Surratt, Mary, 436–437
Survivalists, 89, 94, 683–684, 747
Surviving Global Slavery: Living Under
the New World Order (Spear), 90
Survivor/defector narratives, 496
Suspicion, 577
Susquehannocks, 104
Sutcliffe, Stu, 427
Sutherland, Ranald, 574
Swaggart, Jimmy, 445
Swift, Wesley, 94, 168, 420, 535, 667
SWNCC 257/5, 560
Symbionese Liberation Army, 229
Syndicates, 506
System conspiracy, 513–514
Tabloids, 43
Taft, Alphonso, 656
Taft, William Howard, 141, 656
Taft-Hartley Act of 1947, 613
Tague, James, 385
The Taking of America, 1-2-3 (Sprague),
832
Taliban, 551–552, 649
Talleyrand, Charles Maurice de, 622, 745
Tallmadge, James, 659
Tallmadge Amendment, 659, 660
Tammany Hall, 66, 234, 236
Taney, Roger B., 123, 235–236, 361
Tappan, Arthur, 497
Tappan brothers, 30
Tarbell, Ida, 693
Target Earth, 257
Tariffs, 545, 675, 722
Tarpley, Webster, 149, 150, 673, 840
Tate, Sharon, 459
Tate homicides, 459–460
Tavibo, 282–285
Tax protest movement
militias and, 469–470, 472
Posse Comitatus, 592
Taxes, 723
impost tax of 1781, 539–540
income tax, 341–344

Newburgh conspiracy, 539–541
Whiskey Rebellion, 733–735
Taxi Driver, 568, 609
Taylor, Paul, 293
Taylor, Zachary, 465
Teachers, loyalty oaths, 612–613
Teamsters Union, 317, 452, 541
Teapot Dome investigations, 297–298
Technology, 275
Kaczynski’s view, 706–707
Technophobia, 481, 483, 487–488
Teeter, Lawrence, 401, 871
Teheran Conference, 627
Telecommunications surveillance, 521–522
Telefon, 257
Television, 485, 655
docudramas, 629, 630
Temperance, 179
Terrorism, 227–232
anarchists and, 62
antiterrorism legislation, 231, 574
definitions, 227–228
FEMA and, 251
Irish Republican Army, 353–354
See also Militias; Oklahoma City
bombing
Terrorism Prevention and Effective Death
Penalty Act of 1996, 554
Terry, Joseph Randall, 33
Tesla, Nicola, 199
“Testimony before a Subcommittee of the
Committee on Appropriations”
(MacArthur), 826
“Testimony before HUAC” (Hoover),
809
Tetrahedron, Inc., 46
Teutonia Society, 138
Texas, 4, 464–465, 660, 756
Texas Constitutional Militia, 144
Texas Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, 119
Texas National Guard, 717
Thatcher, H. K., 303
Thatcher, Margaret, 205
Thayer, Webster, 637–638
Thimerosol, 309
Think tanks, 618, 645
Thirteen Days (Kennedy), 217
Thomas, J. Parnell, 319, 325, 326
Thomas, Kenn, 672
Thomas, Mark, 557
Thomas, Stephen, 45
Thompson, Damian, 85
Thompson, Linda, 144, 177, 178, 537,
718
Thornburgh, Richard, 106
Thornley, Kerry, 340
“Thoughts on the Cause of the Present
Discontents” (Burke), 60

Index

The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch
(Dick), 223
322, Mystery of, 656
Thurman, James Thomas, 572
The Ticket that Exploded (Burroughs), 147
Tidwell, James, 440–441
Timberlake, Richard, 288
Time Out of Joint (Dick), 223
Tippit, J. D., 383, 388, 391, 567, 568, 632
Tituba, 639, 640, 740
Tobacco industry, 685–686
Toledo War, 686–688
Tongyai, Thomas, 188
Tonkin Gulf incidents, 521, 689–690
Toothaker, Mary, 524
Top Secret/MAJIC (Friedman), 490
Torbitt Document, 690–691, 828
Totalitarianism, 453
Tower, John, 352
Tower Board, 351, 352
Townsend, Francis, 209, 666
Townshend duties, 60, 131, 132
“Tracking the Real Genocide: AIDSConspiracy or Unnatural Disaster?”
(Gilbert), 45
The Trade in Narcotics (Anslinger), 237
Trafficante, Santos, 218, 394
Traficant, James, Jr., 852, 861
Tragedy and Hope: A History of the World
in Our Time (Quigley), 175, 822
“Trained as Traitors, Liars and
Slavemasters!” (Freedom
Networker), 853
Trance Formation of America (O’Brien),
486–487
Travolta, John, 646
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, 465, 720
Treaty of Versailles, 142
Treichler, Paula, 47
Trenchard, John, 133
Tresca, Carlo, 345
Triad Management Services, 415
Trilateral Commission, 88, 124, 149, 206,
433, 623, 669, 691–692
banking and, 109, 253, 255, 288
as Insiders, 10, 210, 656
militia view, 433
New World Order and, 536
one-world government and, 559
Trilby (du Maurier), 484
Trochmann, John, 473
Troop Sport clothing company, 38, 39
Tropical Fantasy, 38, 39
Trotsky, Leon, 69, 323, 612
Trotskyists, 423
Troubadors, 592–593
True, 700
Trujillo, Rafael Leonidas, 157

Truman, Harry S, 68, 70, 159, 190, 313,
612, 749
MJ-12 and, 489–490
NSA and, 520
UFOs and, 703
Truman Doctrine, 191
The Truman Show, 261–262
Trumbo, Dalton, 319, 321
Trumbull, Douglas, 500
Trusts, 551, 692–694
“The Truth in Time” (Welch), 823
Tuchman, Barbara, 756
Turing, Alan, 242
Turner, John Kenneth, 356
Turner, Nat, 5, 30, 694–696, 788
Turner, Patricia, 35
The Turner Diaries (Pierce), 173, 535,
554, 585–587, 758
Tuskegee syphilis experiments, 35, 38, 45,
183, 309, 577
TWA 800, 572, 573, 696–698
Twain, Mark, 169
Tweed, William, 214
“Tweed Ring,” 214
Twining, Nathan, 490
2001: A Space Odyssey, 500
Tydings, Millard, 462
Tyler, John, 235, 464, 660
Tyson, Mike, 39
Tzara, Tristan, 148
Ubik (Dick), 223
U-boats, 449
UFO conspiracies, 12, 699–705
AIDS and, 46
alien abduction narratives, 21, 120, 251,
488, 703
Alien Autopsy, 629, 704
Church of the SubGenius and, 170
contactee movement, 701, 702
Darkside theories, 704
foo fighters, 699
ghost rockets, 699
gray alien agenda, 46
militias and, 469
mind control and, 482, 487–488
MJ-12, 489–490
mystery merging, 584
opinion polls, 563
Philadelphia experiment, 584
research groups, 701
Roswell myth, 627–630
Scientology and, 647
sightings, 629–630, 699, 701–702,
704
types, 703
See also Area 51; Cattle mutilations;
Roswell incident

UFO Crash at Roswell (Randle and
Schmitt), 629
The UFO Incident, 703
UFOs
Area 51, 91–92, 100, 120, 704
films, 257, 700, 701
Unabomber, 230, 705–707
Uncle Tom’s Cabin (Stove), 5
Underworld (DeLillo), 219, 220
Unfriendlies, 319
Unification Church, 445, 503–505
Unified field theory, 584
Union Leagues, 416
Union Party, 666
Unions
Industrial Workers of the World,
344–347
Ku Klux Klan and, 419
Workingmen’s Benevolent Association,
494–495
United Klans of America (UKA), 420–421
United Nations (UN), 24, 43, 168, 313,
432, 669, 707–708, 749
black helicopters and, 125, 126
contrails and, 199
militias’ view of, 468, 469
New World Order and, 210, 211, 536
one-world government and, 288, 559
United Slaves, 187
United Sons of America, 530
United States
as empire, 126–127
fears of disunion, 224–226
“The U.S. Is Bankrupt” (Traficant), 852
U.S. Labor Party (USLP), 424
U.S. President’s Commission on CIA
Activities Within the United States,
542
United States Public Health Service
(USPHS), 263, 265
United States Steel, 507
Universal Price Code (UPC), 708
Unorganized Militia of the United States,
144
The Untouchables, 452
Urban legends, 607
USS Andrew Furuseth, 584
USS C. Turner Joy, 690
USS Eldridge, 584
USS Enterprise, 581
USS Lackawanna, 302–303
USS Lexington, 581
USS Liberty, 376
USS Maddox, 521, 689–690
USS Maine, 231, 709–712, 751–752
USS Observation Islands, 382
USS Saratoga, 581
USS Vincennes, 572

921

Index

Utopian communities, 233
U-2 spy plane, 521, 565
V. (Pynchon), 601, 602, 603
Valachi, Joseph, 452, 453
Valis (Dick), 223
Vallandigham, Clement, 201, 202
Vallée, Jacques, 584–585
The Valley of Fear (Doyle), 493
Van Buren, John, 77
Van Buren, Martin, 31, 77, 111, 360, 545
Van Doren, Mark, 159
Van Fleet, Mathias, 686
Van Houten, Leslie, 460
Van Sant, Gus, 148
Vance, Cyrus, 692
Vance, James, 683
Vanderberg, Hoyt, 700
Vanderbilt, Cornelius, 214
Vanderbilt, William H., 506
Vanderlip, Frank, 507, 624
Vane, Henry, 331
Vankin, Jonathan, 348
Vanzetti, Alessandro, 637–638
Vanzetti, Bartolomeo, 62
Varigny, Charles de, 303
Vatican, 105, 108, 135. See also Catholic
Church
VENONA Project, 68, 161, 613, 625,
713–714
Verichip, 334
Vesey, Denmark, 5, 694, 714–715
“Veto Message Regarding the Bank of the
United States” (Jackson), 789
Vicary, James, 485, 682
Vidal, Gore, 299, 539, 650
Videodrome, 215
Viereck, George Silvester, 138, 139
Vietnam Veterans Against the War, 188
Vietnam War, 9, 181, 193
Agent Orange, 72
antiwar groups, 72, 229, 294, 752
Cambodian bombing, 151–152,
410–412, 500, 541
cold war and, 193, 396
Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, 376
helicopters, 125
JFK assassination and, 395
Johnson and, 375, 376
King’s view, 408
Kissinger and, 410
Moonies and, 503
NSA and, 521
SDS and, 681
Tonkin Gulf incidents, 689–690
See also Pentagon Papers
A View of New England Illuminati
(Ogden), 339

922

Vindicator (Brownlee), 530
Vineland (Pynchon), 603
Violent Crime Control Act of 1994, 519
Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions, 300,
545
Voice of America, 462
Volkmer, Harold, 143
Volkogonov, Dmitri, 161, 316
Volstead Act, 143
Voltaire, 115, 337
Von Braun, Werner, 690–691
Von Steuben, Friedrich, 667
Voorhees, Daniel W., 201
Voorhis, Jerry, 541
Voting rights, immigrants, 531
Voting Rights Act of 1965, 171
Waco, 126, 197, 467, 469, 717–719
BATF and, 143, 175, 520, 555, 634
FBI and, 175, 634
helicopters and, 126
McVeigh’s view, 230, 554
Waco: The Big Lie, 718
Waco: The Rules of Engagement, 175
Waco Holocaust Electronic Museum
(WHEM), 144, 718
Wadsworth, William, 3
Walcott, Louis Eugene. See Farrakhan,
Louis
Walker, David, 29, 30
Walker, Edwin, 566
Walker, William, 719–721
Wall Street conspiracy, 360–361, 435, 575,
625, 721–722
Wallace, George, 432
Walpole, Horace, 60
Walsh, Charles, 203
Walsh, Lawrence, 353, 856
Walter, Francis E., 326
Walton, Travis, 703
Wanagi Wacipi (Ghost Dance), 283
Wanniski, Jude, 675
War and Globalization, the Truth behind
9/11 (Chossudovsky), 650
War Games, 294
The War in Nicaragua (Walker), 721
War of 1812, 111, 122, 300, 301–302, 478,
687
War on Iraq, 538, 539
War on Terrorism, 552
Warburg, Paul, 252, 253, 507, 623, 624
Warner, David, 646
Warner, James K., 534–535
Warnke, Mike, 642
Warrant for Genocide (Cohn), 595
Warren, Benjamin, 92
Warren, Earl, 9, 327, 366, 383–384, 454,
723

John Birch society and, 373
Warren Commission, 140, 157, 219,
383–384, 396, 542, 565, 632, 676,
677, 723–725, 818
Was It Only a Paper Moon?, 501
Washington, George, 60, 134, 225, 768,
774
Alien and Sedition Acts and, 49, 51, 300
Arnold and, 92–94
British conspiracy and, 134
Conway Cabal, 199–201
Democratic Republic Societies and,
221
as Freemason, 75, 226, 270, 272
Hamilton and, 297
Newburgh conspiracy and, 540
Society of the Cincinnati and, 668
Whiskey Rebellion and, 733–735
Washington Post, 163, 582, 730
Washington Times, 503–504, 505
Watch the Skies! (Peebles), 629
Watchdog groups, 467, 470, 471, 472–473
Watergate, 9, 72, 152, 194, 250, 500,
541–542, 645, 725–731
Bay of Pigs and, 117–118, 729
conspiracy theories, 396, 728–729
films, 257, 571
gaps and deletions, 726–728
hearings, 353
HUAC and, 327
investigations, 725–726
Kissinger and, 412
Liddy and, 433–435
Onassis and, 558
Plumbers, 434, 542, 583, 725–726
significance of, 729–730
Skeleton Key, 541, 729
Smoking Gun tape, 542, 728–729
tapes, 726–729
See also Nixon, Richard
Watergate Special Prosecution Force
(WSPF), 726–728
Waters, Maxine, 182, 183
Watney, Simon, 46
Watson, John B., 484
Watson, Tom, 590
Watt, Mel, 182
The Way the World Works (Wanniski), 675
Wayne, John, 256
Wayne, “Mad” Anthony, 618
We Never Landed on the Moon (Kaysing),
501
Weather Underground, 72, 229, 732–733
Weathermen, 128, 188, 229, 513, 568, 681,
731–733
Weaver, James, 590
Weaver, Randall J. (Randy), 143, 520,
632–635, 758

Index

Weaver, Samuel, 632, 634
Weaver, Vicki, 119, 632, 633, 634
Web of Conspiracy (Roscoe), 439
Webb, Gary, 179, 180–181
Weber, Mark, 323
Webster, Daniel, 114, 122, 359, 545
Webster, Nesta, 82–83, 433, 474, 621
Weed, Thurlow, 3, 76
Weeden, Carthel, 409
Weinberger, Caspar, 350, 351–352, 353,
692
Weinstein, Allen, 161
Weir, Benjamin, 351
Weishaupt, Adam, 3, 10, 88, 272, 335, 336,
340, 654
Weiss, Carl Austin, 446, 447
Weissman, Bernard, 630–631, 632
Welch, Robert H., 10, 373–374, 707,
823
Welfare, 431
Welles, Orson, 311–313, 751
Wells, H. G., 483
West Nile virus, 309
West Point, 92, 93
Western Federation of Miners (WFM),
345, 355
Western Journalism Center, 645
The Western Lands (Burroughs), 147
Western territories, 3, 5
“The Westmoreland Resolves” (Lee), 765
Whalen, John, 348
“What We’re Fighting For,” 649
Whately, Elise, 442
Whately, Oliver, 442
Whatever Happened to the Human Race?,
647
Wheelwright, John, 331
Which Side Were You On? (Isserman), 69
Whig Party, 61, 73, 76–77, 214, 277, 531,
641
American anti-Jacksonians, 362–363
anti-rent war and, 77–79
British, 363, 605, 606
Know-Nothings and, 413, 414
nullification and, 545
Whiskey Rebellion, 3, 221, 229, 511, 512,
617, 733–735
“Whiskey Ring,” 214
Whistle-blowers, 258
White, Alma, 7, 806
White, Andrew, 369
White, Ellen G., 370, 651
White, Eugene, 674
White, Harry Dexter, 326
White, James, 651
White, Lawrence, 286
White Album (Beatles), 459
White Aryan Resistance, 535, 556

White House Special Investigations Unit.
See Plumbers
White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan of
Mississippi, 420
White Night, 377–379
White Noise (DeLillo), 219
White Power movement, 534, 535
White Russian forces, 596
White slave trade, 735–737
White supremacists, 121, 173, 419, 633
William L. Pierce, 585–587
See also Posse Comitatus
Whited, Millard, 444
Whitewater scandal, 175, 643, 644–645,
737–738
Whitside, Samuel M., 285
Whitted, John, 700
Who Killed John Lennon (Bresler), 427
“Whole Bay of Pigs Thing” (Nixon), 830
Who’s Who in the CIA, 378
Why Are We in Vietnam? (Mailer), 453,
568
“Why I Got Out of It,” 249
Why Was Lincoln Murdered
(Eisenschiml), 439
Wickstrom, James, 473
Wiener, Jon, 426
Wieseltier, Leon, 372
Wiggins, J. E., 289
Wilburn, Cathy, 556
Wilburn, Glenn, 556
Wilcox, George, 628
Wilderness, 522
Wilkes, John, 60
Wilkinson, General, 430
Wilkinson, James, 146
Will (Liddy), 435
Willey, Mark E., 874
William and Mary of Orange, 424–425
William III, 108, 600, 601
Williams, Roger, 330, 599
Williams, Ronald, 57
Williams, Wayne, 38
Willing, Thomas, 110
Willis, Gordon, 571
Wills, Frank, 726
Wilmot, David, 660
Wilmot Proviso, 31, 660
Wilson, Charles, 539
Wilson, George, 715
Wilson, John, 167, 177, 330–331, 715
Wilson, John Lyde, 31
Wilson, Richard, 56–57
Wilson, Robert Anton, 339–341
Wilson, Woodrow, 1, 141–142, 211, 290,
625, 693
Winchell, Walter, 452
Winfrey, Oprah, 38

Wingate, George W., 518
Winrod, Gerald D., 9, 83, 138–139
Winthrop, James, 75
Winthrop, John, 1, 80, 330, 331, 598
Wiretaps, 152, 411–412, 583
Wirt, William, 76
Wisdom Lodge, 512
WITCH (Women’s International Terrorist
Conspiracy from Hell), 578, 741
Witch hunts, 70, 85, 640
Witchcraft, 1–2, 27, 739–742. See also
Salem witch trials
The Witches’ Hammer (Kraemer and
Sprenger), 642
Witness (Chambers), 159, 160
Witter, Dean, 656
Wohlstetter, Roberta, 626
Wolfe, Donald H., 499
Women, 732–733, 740. See also Salem
witch trials
The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (Baum), 141,
590
Wonders of the Invisible World (Mather),
639, 741, 760
Wood, Gordon, 20, 134
Woodbury, Levi, 361
Woodruff, Judy, 610
Woods, Rose Mary, 728
Woodstock typewriter #230099, 315,
316
Woodward, Bob, 571, 658, 730, 744
Working Class Union (WCU), 289
Workingmen’s Benevolent Association
(WBA), 494–495
Workingmen’s Party, 532
World Bank, 205, 624
World Christian Fundamentals
Association, 83
World Community of Al-Islam in the
West, 518
World Court, 209, 298
World Health Organization (WHO), 43
World Peace Council, 544
World Trade Center, 228
1993 bombing, 230
See also September 11 terrorist attacks
World Trade Organization, 24, 206, 536,
538
World War I, 6–7, 8, 249
American Protective League, 615–616
IWW and, 346
as Jewish plot, 321–322
Zimmerman telegram, 756–757
World War II, 8–9, 211, 374, 516
Japanese Americans and, 364–366
Pearl Harbor, 364–366, 579–582, 626
World Watchers International, 140
World Wide Web, 347. See also Internet

923

Index

Wounded Knee (1973), 56, 188, 283, 285
Wovoka (Jack Wilson), 282–285
Wright, Phineas G., 201
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, 91, 198,
700
Wu-Tang Clan, 607, 608
“X” article (Kennan), 211
X-Day, 170
Xenophobia, 52
X-15 rocket plane, 502
X-Files: Fight the Future, 743
The X-Files, 22, 198, 251, 259, 488, 577,
704, 743–745
X-33 program, 101
XYZ affair, 52, 511, 745–746
Yale University, 256, 338, 656
Yalta conference, 313, 627, 748–750

924

The Yankee and Cowboy War (Oglesby),
396
Yatskov, Anatoly, 99
Yeats, W. B., 593
Yellow journalism, 750–752
Yellowstone National Park, 708
Yippies, 165, 166, 752–753
YMCA, 427
Yockey, Francis Parker, 432
Yom Kippur War, 551
York Rite of Masonry, 226
You, the Jury (Cutler), 163
Young, Brigham, 510
Young, John, 79
Youth International Party (YIP),
752–753
Y2K, 9, 470–471, 747–748
Zamora, Lonnie, 701–702

Zangara, Giuseppe, 625
Zapruder, Abraham, 384
Zapruder film, 219, 384, 385, 392, 610,
691, 724
Zenger, John Peter, 53, 755–756
Ziegler, Charles, 628, 630
Zimmerman, John, 322
Zimmerman, Phil, 242
Zimmermann, Arthur, 756–757
Zimmermann telegram, 282, 756–757,
804
Zinoviev, Grigori, 323
Zionism, 84, 322–323, 632, 757
Zionist Occupied Government (ZOG),
119, 537, 683, 758
Zirbel, Craig, 393–394
Zwack, Xavier, 336

About the Editor
Peter Knight teaches American Studies at the University of Manchester, UK. He is the author of Conspiracy Culture: From the Kennedy Assassination to The X-Files and the editor of Conspiracy Nation: The Politics of Paranoia in Postwar America.

925

